Sustainable
Recovery

World Energy Outlook Special Report

in collaboration with the International Monetary Fund

INTERNATIONAL ENERGY
AGENCY
The IEA examines
the full spectrum
of energy issues
including oil, gas
and coal supply and
demand, renewable
energy technologies,
electricity markets,
energy efficiency,
access to energy,
demand side
management and
much more. Through
its work, the IEA
advocates policies
that will enhance
the reliability,
affordability and
sustainability of
energy in its 30
member countries,
8 association
countries and
beyond.

IEA member
countries:

IEA association
countries:

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States

Brazil
China
India
Indonesia
Morocco
Singapore
South Africa
Thailand

The European
Commission also
participates in the
work of the IEA

Please note that this
publication is subject to
specific restrictions that limit
its use and distribution. The
terms and conditions are
available online at
www.iea.org/t&c/
Source: IEA. All rights
reserved.
International Energy Agency
Website: www.iea.org

Revised version, July
2020. Information notice
found at:
www.iea.org/corrigenda

Foreword
As it grapples with the unprecedented health emergency triggered by the Covid‐19 pandemic,
the world is experiencing its worst economic shock since the 1930s. This is having a severe
impact on employment and investment across all parts of the economy, including energy.
Governments have taken the lead in providing urgent financial and economic relief to prevent
the crisis from spiralling further downward. Today, attention is increasingly focusing on how to
bring about an economic recovery that repairs the damage inflicted by the crisis while putting
the world on a stronger footing for the future.
Since the scale of the economic crisis began to emerge, the International Energy Agency (IEA)
has been leading the calls for governments to make the recovery as sustainable and resilient as
possible. This means immediately addressing the core issues of global recession and soaring
unemployment – and doing so in a way that also takes into account the key challenge of building
cleaner and more secure energy systems.
At the IEA, we quickly re‐focused the work of our analytical teams across the Agency on the
shocks caused by the crisis to global energy demand, assessing the impact across all major fuels
including oil, gas, coal, electricity and renewables. We then quantified and examined the
staggering effects in key areas, such as the unparalleled 20% plunge in global energy investment
that is expected this year. And now, we are identifying the most effective measures available to
governments as they consider their once‐in‐a‐lifetime recovery plans. The Sustainable Recovery
Plan proposed in this report is the result.
The Sustainable Recovery Plan is not intended to tell governments what they must do. It seeks
to show them what they can do. Whether countries choose to follow the measures laid out in
the plan remains their sovereign choice. Our plan – a combination of policy actions and targeted
investments – offers a hugely encouraging picture of what the world can achieve despite the
tremendous difficulties we face today.
As they design economic recovery plans, policy makers are having to make enormously
consequential decisions in a very short space of time. These decisions will shape economic and
energy infrastructure for decades to come and will almost certainly determine whether the
world has a chance of meeting its long‐term energy and climate goals. Our Sustainable Recovery
Plan shows governments have a unique opportunity today to boost economic growth, create
millions of new jobs and put global greenhouse gas emissions into structural decline.
The IEA’s work is designed to provide the world’s top decision‐makers in government, industry
and the investment community with the strongest possible data, analysis and options to enable
them choose the best path forward. With this in mind, we are bringing all of these groups
together at the IEA Clean Energy Transitions Summit on 9 July 2020 in an effort to identify how
to step up actions that achieve real‐world results.

IEA. All rights reserved

A sustainable recovery is within our reach – I hope the grand coalition of global energy leaders
we are assembling will seize this opportunity.
Dr. Fatih Birol
Executive Director
International Energy Agency
Foreword

3

IEA. All rights reserved

Acknowledgements
This study, a cross‐agency effort, was prepared by the World Energy Outlook team in
co‐operation with all divisions in the Directorate of Sustainability, Technology and Outlooks,
the Strategic Initiatives Office and the Directorate of Energy Markets and Sustainability. The
study was designed and directed by Laura Cozzi, Chief Energy Modeller.
The lead authors and co‐ordinators were: Christophe McGlade and Daniel Wetzel. Daniel
Crow, Blandine Barreau and Davide D’Ambrosio were also part of the core group. Laszlo
Varro, Chief Economist, provided essential guidance. The International Monetary Fund, in
particular Benjamin Hunt and Keiko Honjo, partnered with the IEA to provide the
macroeconomic analysis.
The other main authors were: Zakia Adam (subsidies and data support), Yasmine Arsalane
(power), Heymi Bahar (renewables), Stéphanie Bouckaert (modelling co‐ordination),
Arthur Contejean (access), Elisabetta Cornago (transport), Amrita Dasgupta (transport),
Connor Donovan (power), Musa Erdogan (industry), Araceli Fernandez Pales (innovation
lead), Timothy Goodson (buildings lead), Maxine Jordan (buildings), Vanessa Koh (power),
Kevin Lane (buildings), Pharoah Le Feuvre (biofuels), Lilly Lee (transport), Olivier Lejeune
(macro
analysis),
Sara Moarif
(context),
Samantha McCulloch
(innovation),
Kieran McNamara (grids), Ariane Millot (buildings), Sarbojit Pal (transport), Leonardo Paoli
(transport), Sebastian Papapanagiotou (grids), Claudia Pavarini (power), Daniele Perugia
(grids), Apostolos Petropoulos (transport lead), Alison Pridmore (urban infrastructure),
Uwe Remme (innovation), Arnaud Rouget (access), Hugo Salamanca (industry),
Andreas Schroeder (industry lead), Leonie Staas (jobs), Brent Wanner (power lead).
The study also relied on support from across the entire World Energy Outlook team.
Teresa Coon and Eleni Tsoukala provided essential support.
Edmund Hosker carried editorial responsibility. Debra Justus was the copy‐editor.
Valuable comments and feedback were provided by other senior management and
numerous other colleagues within the IEA. In particular Mechthild Wörsdörfer,
Keisuke Sadamori, Alessandro Blasi, Joel Couse, Paolo Frankl, Peter Fraser, Rebecca Gaghen,
Tim Gould, Timur Gül, Brian Motherway, Masatoshi Sugiura, Lucila Arboleya Sarazola and
Peter Janoska.

IEA. All rights reserved

Thanks go to the IEA’s Communication and Digitalisation Office for their help in producing
the report and website materials, particularly to Jad Mouawad, Jethro Mullen,
Astrid Dumond, Christopher Gully, Isabelle Nonain‐Semelin, Julie Puech and Therese Walsh.
Diana Browne provided essential support to the production process. IEA’s Office of the Legal
Counsel, Office of Management and Administration and Energy Data Centre provided
assistance throughout the preparation of the report.
We are grateful for the guidance and valuable advice of Peter Betts on climate issues.
Valuable input to the analysis was provided by David Wilkinson (independent consultant).

Acknowledgements

5

The work could not have been achieved without the support and co‐operation provided by
many government bodies, organisations and companies worldwide, notably: Ministry of
Economy, Trade and Industry, Japan; and Mistry of the Environment, Land and Sea, Italy on
smart grids and power system modernisation. Activities within the IEA Clean Energy
Technologies Programme provided valuable support to this report.
A webinar and an online consultation was held at the end of March 2020 in which
participants offered valuable insights, feedback and data for this analysis. We are grateful for
their input.
A number of senior government officials and international experts provided input and
reviewed preliminary report drafts. Comments and suggestions that were of great value for
the report were received from:

IEA. All rights reserved

Lydia Shawel Abebe
Angeline Afanoukoe
Doug Arent
Jason Babik
Georg Baeuml
Richard Baron
Jim Barrett
Harmeet Bawa
Sama Bilbao y Leon
Rina Bohle Zeller
Jason Bordoff
Nils Borg
Alex Bowen
William Brent
Sam Brock
Mark Brownstein
Simon Buckle
Nick Butler
Sally Cairns
Ben Caldecott
Julie Cammell
Pantelis Capros
Anne‐Sophie Cerisola
Russel Conklin
Beth Copanas
Paula Coussy
Francois Dassa
Brian Dean
6

World Health Organization (WHO)
Nexans
US National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL)
Westinghouse
Volkswagen
2050 Pathways Platform
Barrett Economics
ABB Power Grids
Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA)
Vestas, Denmark
Columbia University, United States
European Council for an Energy Efficient Economy
London School of Economics and Political Science
Power for All
American Wind Energy Association
Environmental Defense Fund, United States
Organisation for Economic Co‐operation and Development
(OECD)
Kings College London
University of Leeds
University of Oxford
Global Off‐Grid Lighting Association
E3Modelling
United Nations
US Department of Energy
RES
IFP Energies Nouvelles
EDF
Sustainable Energy for All
World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

IEA. All rights reserved

Nicolas Di Sbroiavacca
Navroz Dubash
Candice El‐Asmar
David Elzinga
Normant Emmanuel
Alex Evans
Olivier Fontan
James Foster
Christopher Frey
Jean‐François Gagné
Faith Gan
Peter George
Michael Ghielmetti
Arunabha Ghosh
Dolf Gielen
Peter Gornischeff
Michael Grubb
Stéphane Hallegatte
Atle Harby
Antoine Herzog
Christina Hood
Frank Jotzo
Michael Kelly
Fabian Kesicki
Hoseok Kim
Tomasz Kozluk
Jochen Kreusel
Vedantha Kumar
Bharadwaj Kummamuru
Michał Kurtyka
Rodolfo Lacy
Carole Lancereau
Joyce Lee
Aaron Leopold
Karan Mangotra
Michael Mavrovouniotis
Espen Mehlum
Bert Metz
Axel Michaelowa
Vincent Minier
Acknowledgements

Fundación Bariloche
Centre for Policy Research, India
Permanent Delegation of Australia to the OECD
Asian Development Bank
Saint‐Gobain
Global LPG Partnership
Haut Conseil pour le Climat, France
UK Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy
ENERCON
Department of Natural Resources Canada
Energy Market Authority, Singapore
Clean Cooking Alliance
ABB
Council on Energy, Environment and Water, India
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA)
Permanent Representation of Estonia to the OECD and
UNESCO
University College London
The World Bank
Sintef
EDF
Compass Climate
Australian National University
World LPG Association
E.ON SE
Korea Environment Institute
OECD
T&D Europe
UK Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy
World Bioenergy Association
Minister of Climate, Poland
OECD
Ministry for the Ecological and Inclusive Transition, France
Global Wind Energy Council
African Mini‐Grid Association
The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI)
Wellspring Climate Initiative
World Economic Forum
European Climate Foundation
University of Zurich / Perspectives Climate Change
Schneider Electric
7

Simone Mori
Luis Mundaca
Clay Nesler
Sarah Neumann
Patrick Oliva
Koen Peters
Volkmar Pflug
Ivan Pineda
Michael Pollitt
Lynn Price
Michael Renner
Rasmus Nicolas Ringgaard
Seth Roberts
Nick Robins
Karen Roiy
Raffaele Rossi
Catherine Saget
Yamina Saheb
Carlos Salle Alonso
Roberto Schaeffer
Joachim Schmitz
Rob Schwiers
Simon Sharpe
Adnan Shihab Eldin
Maria Sicilia
Jim Skea

IEA. All rights reserved

Ottavia Stella
Ivan Torre
Matteo Trascinelli
Diana Ürge‐Vorsatz
Frank van der Vleuten
Willem Tom Van Ierland
Jean‐Pascal van Ypersele
Christelle Verstraeten
David Victor
Salvatore Vinci
Doug Vine
8

ENEL
Lund University
Johnson Controls
Federal Ministry for Climate Action Environment Energy
Mobility Innovation and Technology, Austria
Paris Process on Mobility and Climate
GOGLA (Global association for the off‐grid solar energy
industry)
Siemens
WindEurope
University of Cambridge
US Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA)
Permanent Delegation of Denmark to the OECD
Saudi Aramco
London School of Economics and Political Science
Danfoss
Solar Power Europegeo
International Labour Organization
OpenEXP
Iberdrola
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, Germany
Chevron
UK Cabinet Office
Foundation for the Advancement of Sciences, Kuwait
ENAGAS
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Working
Group III Co‐Chair
ENI
The World Bank
ABB
Central European University
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, The Netherlands
DG Climate Action, European Commission
Université Catholique de Louvain, Belgium
ChargePoint
UC San Diego School of Global Policy and Strategy,
United States
World Health Organization (WHO)
Center for Climate and Energy Solutions (C2ES)
World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Jeff Waller
Wang Yanjia
Wang Yao
Peter Wooders
Akira Yabumoto
Kyota Yamamoto
Mel Ydreos
Kandeh Yumkella

ENGIE Impact
Tsinghua University
International Institute Green Finance
International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD)
J‐POWER
Ministry of Economy Trade and Industry, Japan
International Gas Union
Former UN Under‐Secretary General and first CEO of
Sustainable Energy for All

The individuals and organisations that contributed to this study are not responsible for any
opinions or judgements it contains. All errors and omissions are solely the responsibility of
the IEA.

IEA. All rights reserved

This document and any map included herein are without prejudice to the status of or
sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries
and to the name of any territory, city or area.

Acknowledgements

9

IEA. All rights reserved

Table of Contents
Foreword........................................................................................................................... 3
Acknowledgements ........................................................................................................... 5
Executive summary ......................................................................................................... 13
1

Covid‐19 and energy: setting the scene

17

1.1 Introduction................................................................................................... 18
1.2 Macroeconomic impacts of the crisis ............................................................ 19
1.3 Covid‐19 crisis and the energy sector............................................................ 21
1.3.1 Energy sector investment .................................................................. 24
1.3.2 Jobs in the energy sector ................................................................... 25
1.4 How should governments respond?.............................................................. 28
1.4.1 How the energy sector features in announced emergency
and recovery plans ............................................................................ 30
1.4.2 Lessons from the 2008‐09 financial crisis for stimulus spending on
clean energy technologies ................................................................. 32
1.4.3 Why is a sustainable recovery plan needed for the energy sector? .. 34
2

Evaluation of possible recovery measures

37

2.1 Introduction................................................................................................... 38
2.1.1 Overview of findings on jobs and emissions ...................................... 39
2.2 Electricity ....................................................................................................... 43
2.2.1 Expand and modernise grids ............................................................. 45
2.2.2 Accelerate the growth of wind and solar PV ..................................... 48
2.2.3 Maintain the role of hydro and nuclear power ................................. 52
2.2.4 Manage gas‐ and coal‐fired power generation.................................. 55
2.3 Transport ....................................................................................................... 58
2.3.1 New vehicles ...................................................................................... 60
2.3.2 Expand high‐speed rail networks ...................................................... 64

IEA. All rights reserved

2.3.3 Improve urban infrastructure ............................................................ 65
2.4 Buildings ........................................................................................................ 68
2.4.1 Retrofit existing buildings and more efficient new constructions ..... 70
2.4.2 More efficient and connected household appliances ....................... 73
Table of Contents

11

2.4.3 Improve access to clean cooking ....................................................... 76
2.5 Industry ......................................................................................................... 80
2.5.1 Improve energy efficiency and increase electrification ..................... 82
2.5.2 Expand waste and material recycling ................................................ 84
2.6 Fuels .............................................................................................................. 85
2.6.1 Reduce methane emissions from oil and gas operations .................. 87
2.6.2 Reform fossil fuel subsidies ............................................................... 90
2.6.3 Support and expand the use of biofuels ............................................ 93
2.7 Strategic opportunities in technology innovation ......................................... 96
2.7.1 Hydrogen technologies ...................................................................... 97
2.7.2 Batteries ............................................................................................ 98
2.7.3 Small modular nuclear reactors ....................................................... 100
2.7.4 Carbon capture, utilisation and storage .......................................... 101
3

A sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector

103

3.1 Introduction................................................................................................. 104
3.2 Objectives and design of a sustainable recovery plan for energy ............... 104
3.2.1 Goals of a global sustainable recovery plan for energy ................... 104
3.2.2 Sustainable recovery plan measures ............................................... 105
3.2.3 Policies to support the sustainable recovery plan ........................... 111
3.2.4 Recovery plans in developing economies ........................................ 114
3.3 Implications of the sustainable recovery plan ............................................. 116
3.3.1 The economy ................................................................................... 116
3.3.2 The energy sector ............................................................................ 122
3.3.3 The environment ............................................................................. 123
3.3.4 Energy security and resilience ......................................................... 126

Annexes

IEA. All rights reserved

Annex A. Employment analysis methodology ................................................................ 129
Annex B. Definitions ...................................................................................................... 151
Annex C. References ...................................................................................................... 163

12

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Executive Summary
The Covid‐19 pandemic has created a historic crisis for economies and energy
markets
The biggest global economic shock in peacetime since the 1930s is having a severe impact
on employment and investment across all sectors, including energy. With the global
economy set to shrink by 6% in 2020, some 300 million jobs may have been lost during the
second quarter of the year. This disruption has sent shock waves through energy markets,
with global energy investment expected to shrink by an unparalleled 20% in 2020.
The energy sector, particularly electricity, has played a critical role in the global response
to the Covid‐19 crisis. Uninterrupted energy supplies have enabled hospitals to provide
care, food and other essentials to be delivered, and millions of people to work and study
from home while maintaining social contact online. Without access to reliable and
affordable electricity, the lockdowns introduced by governments to tackle the public health
crisis would have resulted in far greater economic damage.
Governments are responding to the economic crisis on a massive scale. So far, they have
announced measures worth about USD 9 trillion, focusing primarily on emergency financial
and economic relief to prevent an even deeper crisis. With more stimulus coming,
attention is now turning to longer‐term recovery plans that seek to repair the economic
damage from the disruptions caused by confinement measures and restrictions on
mobility. Some plans already include energy, and its role could grow in successive rounds of
stimulus spending.

A Sustainable Recovery Plan

IEA. All rights reserved

In response to calls from governments around the world, the IEA has produced a
Sustainable Recovery Plan for actions that can be taken over the next three years. This
detailed plan is focused on cost‐effective measures that could be implemented during the
specific timeframe of 2021 to 2023. It spans six key sectors – electricity, transport, industry,
buildings, fuels and emerging low‐carbon technologies. The plan takes into account
national and international objectives for long‐term growth, future‐proofed jobs and
sustainable development goals.
Based on rigorous analysis conducted in co‐operation with the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), the Sustainable Recovery Plan has three main goals: boosting economic
growth, creating jobs and building more resilient and cleaner energy systems. The plan
sets out the policies and targeted investments for each key sector, including measures
designed to: (1) accelerate the deployment of low‐carbon electricity sources like new wind
and solar, and the expansion and modernisation of electricity grids; (2) increase the spread
of cleaner transport such as more efficient and electric vehicles, and high‐speed rail; (3)
improve the energy efficiency of buildings and appliances; (4) enhance the efficiency of
equipment used in industries such as manufacturing, food and textiles; (5) make the
production and use of fuels more sustainable; and (6) boost innovation in crucial
Executive Summary

13

technology areas including hydrogen, batteries, carbon capture utilisation and storage, and
small modular nuclear reactors.
Governments are set to make major decisions that will affect huge amounts of
investment and shape infrastructure and industries for decades to come. Massive
stimulus packages offer a unique opportunity to put the energy sector on a more
sustainable path. Compared with the 2008‐09 crisis, the costs of leading clean energy
technologies such as wind and solar PV are far lower, and some emerging technologies like
batteries and hydrogen are ready to scale up. Global CO2 emissions flat‐lined in 2019 and
are set for a record decline this year. While this drop, which results from lockdown
measures and their economic impacts, is nothing to celebrate, it provides a base from
which to put emissions into structural decline.

The plan provides a significant boost to jobs and growth …
Our Sustainable Recovery Plan shows it is possible to simultaneously spur economic
growth, create millions of jobs and put emissions into structural decline. Through detailed
assessments of more than 30 specific energy policy measures to be carried out over the
next three years, this report considers the circumstances of individual countries as well as
existing pipelines of energy projects and current market conditions. Achieving the results
outlined below would require global investment of about USD 1 trillion annually over the
next three years. This represents about 0.7% of global GDP.
This plan can add 1.1 percentage points to global economic growth each year. It would
boost the annual growth of developing countries by around 1.3 percentage points and lead
to global GDP being 3.5% higher in 2023 than it would have been otherwise. It would also
bring lasting benefits to the global economy because investment in new infrastructure,
such as electricity grids and more energy‐efficient buildings and industries, would improve
the overall productivity of both workers and capital. The measures would also accelerate
the achievement of sustainable development goals: around 420 million people would gain
access to clean‐cooking solutions in low‐income countries, and nearly 270 million people
would gain access to electricity.

IEA. All rights reserved

The effect on employment would be significant, saving or creating roughly 9 million jobs
a year over the next three years. Our new IEA energy employment database shows that in
2019, the energy industry – including electricity, oil, gas, coal and biofuels – directly
employed around 40 million people globally. Our analysis estimates that 3 million of those
jobs have been lost or are at risk due to the impacts of the Covid‐19 crisis, with another
3 million jobs lost or under threat in related areas such as vehicles, buildings and industry.
The largest amount of new jobs would be in retrofitting buildings and other measures to
improve their energy efficiency, and in the electricity sector, particularly in grids and
renewables. The other major areas where jobs are created or saved include energy
efficiency in industries such as manufacturing, food and textiles; low‐carbon transport
infrastructure; and more efficient and new energy vehicles.
14

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

The global energy sector would also become more resilient, making countries better
prepared for future crises. Investment in enhancing and digitalising electricity grids,
upgrading hydropower facilities, extending the lifetime of nuclear power and increasing
energy efficiency would improve electricity security by lowering the risk of outages,
boosting flexibility, reducing losses and helping integrate larger shares of variable
renewables such as wind and solar PV. Electricity grids, the backbone of secure and reliable
power systems, would see a 40% increase in investment after years of decline. This would
put them on a stronger footing to withstand natural disasters, severe weather and other
potential threats.

… and helps put the world on a trajectory in line with international climate
goals
As a result of the Sustainable Recovery Plan, annual energy‐related greenhouse gas
emissions would be 4.5 billion tonnes lower in 2023 than they would be otherwise. After
the 2008‐09 financial crisis, global CO2 emissions bounced back with the largest increase
ever recorded as the world economy started growing again. The Sustainable Recovery Plan
would avoid that kind of rebound in emissions and instead put them into structural decline
while still generating economic growth and creating jobs. Air pollution emissions would also
decrease by 5% as a result of the plan, reducing health risks around the world.
The plan would make 2019 the definitive peak in global emissions, putting them on a
path towards achieving long‐term climate goals, including the Paris Agreement. Energy
efficiency measures would deliver the largest overall emissions reductions under the plan,
accompanied by a major increase in low‐carbon electricity generation. Emissions of
methane, a potent greenhouse gas, from oil and gas operations would fall. Around one‐
third of the reductions in greenhouse gas emissions would result from measures that also
save money for consumers and industries. The process of reforming inefficient fossil fuel
subsidies would also accelerate, taking advantage of low oil and gas prices to avoid hurting
consumers.

IEA. All rights reserved

Governments have a once‐in‐a‐lifetime opportunity to shape a better energy
future
A wide range of policies, initiatives and new regulatory frameworks would be required to
support the deployment of this plan. The focus for governments should be to deliver
resilient and clean energy projects that are shovel‐ready. They also need to develop a
strong pipeline of new projects and to tailor support for distressed industries such as the
auto sector. Creating the right investment conditions will be critical for mobilising large
quantities of private capital and ensuring that this aligns with the goals of the Sustainable
Recovery Plan. International co‐operation is also essential to help align different countries’
actions and re‐establish global supply chains.

Executive Summary

15

IEA. All rights reserved

The IEA has been leading the calls for governments to make the economic recovery as
sustainable and resilient as possible. We first conducted detailed analysis of the impact on
global energy demand and assessed the damage caused in key areas. With this report, we
are identifying the most effective measures available to governments as they consider their
recovery plans. The Sustainable Recovery Plan is not intended to tell governments what
they must do. It seeks to show them what they can do. The IEA is providing decision‐makers
in government, industry and the investment community with the strongest possible data,
analysis and policy options to help them choose the best path forwards. We are bringing all
of these groups together to identify how to act on the findings of this report at the IEA
Clean Energy Transitions Summit on 9 July 2020.

16

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Chapter 1
Covid-19 and energy: setting the scene
S U M M A R Y
• The economic crisis caused by the coronavirus pandemic is prompting governments
around the world to enact emergency support measures. Understandably, most of
the measures announced so far focus on healthcare and financial support for
vulnerable households and businesses. There are large variations between
countries, but the announced fiscal measures in G20 countries represent around 7%
of each country’s gross domestic product on average.

• The energy sector has played a vital role in supporting the delivery of healthcare,
remote working and many other needs. Like many other sectors, it has been strongly
affected by the Covid-19 crisis. Global energy demand is estimated to fall by around
6% in 2020 relative to 2019. We estimate that around 8% of the 40 million jobs
directly provided by the energy sector are at risk or have already been lost.
Electricity from renewables could be the only energy source to grow in 2020, thanks
to new capacity additions and priority dispatch.

• Attention is now turning to longer term recovery plans that seek to repair the
economic damage being caused by Covid-19, minimise job losses among the
300 million jobs thought to be at risk globally, and help to create new jobs. Decisions
made now will inevitably shape infrastructure and industries for decades.

• Recovery plans need to be aligned with long-term national and global objectives on
energy resilience and sustainable development, and it is essential that they focus on
clean energy transitions if those are to be met. Annual global CO2 emissions are
expected to fall by around 8% in 2020, predominantly due to the downturn in
economic activity, but recoveries from previous global economic crises have
generally been accompanied by a large jump in emissions. A similar rebound in
emissions can be expected after this crisis unless there is effort by governments to
place clean energy transitions at the heart of the economic recovery.

IEA. All rights reserved

• This report analyses sector-by-sector over 30 specific energy measures that
governments may wish to include in their economic recovery plans. It draws on new
IEA analysis of the direct and indirect jobs created by different measures and – in
collaboration with the International Monetary Fund – presents an assessment of the
impact of these measures on global economic growth. On this basis, we set out a
sustainable recovery plan – a collection of measures and associated policies,
initiatives and regulatory frameworks for countries to consider in the light of their
own circumstances – with a view to deliver a cleaner, affordable, more secure and
more resilient energy system, and at the same time provide a major boost to
employment and economic growth.

Chapter 1 | Covid-19 and energy: setting the scene

17

1.1

Introduction

The Covid-19 pandemic has delivered a brutal shock to countries around the world. The
immediate focus of governments has necessarily been on healthcare, with parallel
emergency financial and economic interventions to provide essential support to citizens
and businesses, and to help avert economic meltdown.
The energy sector has played a vital role at this time of crisis, not least in enabling the
provision of digital services. In most regions, the energy sector, in particular electricity, has
enabled hospitals to provide care, food to be delivered, and allowed millions of people to
work remotely and be home-schooled: it has also underpinned digital connections with
family and friends. Where access to reliable electricity remains a challenge, the impact of
this on health services, economic activity and the wellbeing of households during the crisis
has served to underline the urgency of achieving universal access to energy (IEA, 2020a).
The enormity of the shock caused by the economic crisis – the largest since the great
depression of the 1930s – is prompting governments around the world to develop recovery
packages on a scale that will shape infrastructure and industries for decades to come.
These packages offer a significant opportunity to advance national and global objectives for
long-term growth and sustainable development. If well designed, the parts of these
packages focussed on the energy sector have the potential to deliver both jobs and growth,
as well as an energy system that is cleaner, more secure, resilient and cost-effective.
A unique feature of the Covid-19 crisis is that governments have had to take short-term
measures that actively suppress economic activity, and it is possible that some of these
measures could continue for some time. Reduced economic activity has been accompanied
by a steep drop in carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. However, these emissions are very likely
to rebound as economies recover, making it increasingly hard to meet sustainable
development goals related to climate and health, and to mitigate other energy risks –
notably those related to climate resilience 1 – in the coming decades. By putting clean
energy transitions at the heart of recovery, governments can help to bring about the
structural changes needed to ensure that economic recovery is not associated with an
unsustainable rebound in CO2 emissions and local air pollution.

IEA. All rights reserved

This special report analyses energy-related measures that could be included in recovery
plans and quantifies their implications for jobs, emissions and energy sector resilience. It
proposes a variety of measures that could provide a major boost to economies, generate
millions of new jobs, make the energy sector more resilient, and provide a pathway
towards achieving long-term climate and sustainable development objectives. Some
measures are likely to be more suitable for particular countries than others, depending on
national circumstances. If countries were to align their actions, however, there could be
1 Resilience of the energy sector refers to the capacity of the energy system or its components to cope with a

hazardous event or trend, such as war, famine and extreme weather. Because climate change can create
conditions that will negatively impact the energy sector, resilience becomes increasingly important (IEA,
2015).

18

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

synergistic gains from better integrated supply chains, cost reductions associated with
cumulative deployment and policy/regulatory co-ordination across markets. Such coordination could make for a more cost-effective and quicker recovery for all.
The report is structured as follows:


Chapter 1 sets the scene. It assesses the macroeconomic impact of the Covid-19
pandemic and its impact on the energy sector, including on energy demand,
investment and employment. It looks at the emergency economic measures
announced or implemented by governments to date. It examines the lessons for clean
energy transitions from stimulus plans in the wake of the 2008-09 financial crisis and
the case for energy being an important part of stimulus programmes. The chapter
concludes with an overview of some of the main ways in which the unique set of
circumstances created by the Covid-19 crisis may influence the design and
implementation of sustainable recovery plans.



Chapter 2 assesses a number of energy sector measures in six areas: electricity,
transport, industry, buildings, fuel supply and strategic opportunities in technology
innovation. It looks at both the short-term and longer term implications of these
measures for job creation, economic growth and energy security, resilience and
emissions. It takes account of major original analysis that has been undertaken for this
report on current employment in the energy sector and the potential for future job
creation. Not all measures are applicable to all countries, but given the breadth of the
measures covered, we hope that all countries will be able to find measures that are
relevant to their particular situation and gain insights from the various specific
examples presented.



Chapter 3 presents a sustainable recovery plan for policy makers to consider, taking
account of the individual circumstances of their countries and their strategic long-term
energy security and sustainability goals. It aims to help countries deliver their energy
security and sustainable energy goals while at the same time boosting jobs and
economic recovery. The gross domestic product (GDP) impacts were assessed in cooperation with the International Monetary Fund (IMF).

IEA. All rights reserved

1.2

Macroeconomic impacts of the crisis

It is still unclear how long the current health crisis will last and how deeply the pandemic
and related containment measures will impact global trade fundamentals, businesses,
consumer behaviour and investor confidence. By mid-April 2020, lockdown measures were
at their peak, with the governments of countries representing almost 60% of the global
economy having mandated full or partial lockdowns, resulting in huge job and output losses
(IEA, 2020a). By mid-May, around one-third of the global population remained under full or
partial lockdown (Figure 1.1).

Chapter 1 | Covid-19 and energy: setting the scene

19

1

Figure 1.1 ⊳

Share of global population under containment measures, 2020

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%

1 January

1 February

Full lockdown
Non-essential businesses closed

1 March

1 April

Partial lockdown
Schools and universities closed

1 May

1 June

Ban on public gatherings

Measures to contain the spread of the pandemic started at the end of January. In midMay, around one-third of the global population remained under full or partial lockdown.
Sources: IEA analysis based on Oxford Covid-19 Government Response Tracker; UNESCO Covid-19
Educational Disruption Database; UN 2019 Revision of World Population Prospects; and
coronavirusmeasures.herokuapp.com, accessed 3 June 2020.

IEA. All rights reserved

The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) expects the global
economy to contract by around 6% in 2020, on the assumption that a second wave of
infections is avoided during the second-half of 2020: this would be the largest economic dip
since the global depression of the 1930s (OECD, 2020). 2 This is similar to a projection by the
IMF which assumes long-lasting containment measures, but no second wave of infections
(IMF, 2020a). GDP is expected to shrink in nearly every country in 2020, although with
significant variation reflecting their differing circumstances. As economic growth
projections have been revised downwards, the unemployment count has continued to rise.
Worldwide, some 300 million full-time jobs could be lost and nearly 450 million companies
are facing the risk of serious disruption (ILO, 2020).
There has been a high degree of volatility in global energy markets, with a major drop in oil
and natural gas prices in early March 2020. This is of particular concern for countries in
which the production and export of oil and gas are central to financing national budgets
(IEA, 2018). Oil and gas income in producer economies such as Iraq, Nigeria, Algeria, Oman
and Angola could fall by as much as 80% in 2020. This would reduce their income to its
lowest level in over two decades (IEA, 2020b) at a time when the social and health
infrastructure of many of these countries face significant strains and their public finances
are in worse shape than during the previous oil price shock in late 2014. Such reductions
would reinforce the importance of economic diversification but also undercut the means to
support it.
2 Values presented for the year 2020 are estimates.

20

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Low-income countries are facing additional pressures in dealing with the pandemic and its
fallout. The ability to mitigate immediate health risks is often compromised by a lack of
access to sanitation and public health infrastructure, high household occupancy rates and a
significant number of low-income, often informal jobs which cannot be carried out
remotely, making it hard to practise social distancing. In 27 sub-Saharan African countries,
close to 60% of health centre facilities are without access to reliable electricity (IEA, 2019),
and over 860 million people worldwide lack access to electricity, severely limiting their
ability to store medicines and food, charge phones, access digital information, maintain
access to education remotely or light their homes effectively (IEA, 2019b).
Many developing economies also have less capacity than advanced economies to boost
spending on health measures, provide emergency assistance to workers, households and
businesses, and rekindle their economies. This is because it is harder for them to deploy
many of the fiscal and monetary levers that are available to advanced economies. In
addition, developing economies often face high levels of debt service: many countries in
sub-Saharan Africa spend more on interest repayments than healthcare. Remittance flows,
which can be a significant source of revenue for many economies, could also fall by around
a fifth in 2020 due to job losses in wealthier countries (World Bank, 2020). International cooperation, assistance and aid will be critical to ensure that developing economies do not
suffer disproportionately from the fallout of the crisis.

1.3

Covid-19 crisis and the energy sector

IEA. All rights reserved

Based on data for the first four months of 2020, and on the assumption of a gradual
recovery in the global economy, we estimate that total primary energy demand will drop in
all major regions and contract globally by around 6% in 2020 (Figure 1.2). This would
amount to a shock around seven-times larger than occurred during the 2008-09 financial
crisis.


Oil demand is expected to drop by around 8% on average across the year. Demand in
April declined by 25%, with transport demand dropping particularly sharply. Demand
is expected to pick up as economic activity increases, but a number of uncertainties
remain over the speed and magnitude of the rebound (IEA, 2020c).



Natural gas demand is expected to fall by around 4%, which would constitute one of
the largest contractions since natural gas became a major industry. However, the
recent major reduction in gas prices, together with the widespread availability of
liquefied natural gas, have created a cushion for gas demand and made it more
competitive with coal, including in many Asian countries.



Coal demand is expected to drop by 8% in 2020, the largest contraction since World
War II, as a result of reductions in demand in major coal consuming countries,
including India. Declines in electricity demand are the principal cause of lower coal use.



Nuclear power is set to fall by 2.5% from 2019 levels due to lower demand and delays
both in refuelling existing projects and in operations at new plants.

Chapter 1 | Covid-19 and energy: setting the scene

21

1



Electricity demand has been depressed by 20% or more during periods of full
lockdown in several countries, with higher residential demand outweighed by reduced
demand for commercial and industrial operations. Demand could fall by 5% globally in
2020 as a whole, and by up to 10% in some regions. Generation from renewables is
expected to increase because of low operating costs, its preferential access in many
power systems, and recent growth in capacity with new projects coming online in
2020. As a result, electricity generation from renewables is expected to rise by nearly
5% in 2020.



Biofuels are likely to see demand decline as a result of reduced transport activity and a
loss of price competitiveness with oil.

The drop in energy demand has also led to a significant reduction in local air pollution,
especially in cities (Box 1.1). Global CO2 emissions in 2020 are expected to fall by around
2.5 gigatonnes (Gt) to just under 31 Gt, around 8% lower than in 2019. This would be the
lowest level since 2010. Nearly all of this decline is due to reductions in economic activity
rather than structural changes in the way the world produces and consumes energy. Unless
there is immediate action to bring about such structural changes, emissions are very likely
to rebound as economies recover.
Figure 1.2 ⊳

Change in global primary energy demand, 1900 to 2020e
Spanish
flu

Great
World
Depression War II

First
oil shock

Second
oil shock

Global financial
crisis

20%
10%
0%
-10%
-20%
1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2020e

Total primary energy demand is set to drop by 6% in 2020, the largest relative
decline in 70 years and the biggest ever decline in absolute terms.
Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.

IEA. All rights reserved

Source: IEA (2020a).

22

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Box 1.1 ⊳

Effects of lockdowns on traffic congestion and air quality in cities

More than 90% of people worldwide are exposed to unsafe levels of fine particulate
matter (PM2.5) over their lifetimes. Outdoor air pollution still accounts for around
3 million premature deaths globally, mostly in middle income countries in the Middle
East and Asia.
In regions with lockdowns, there was a decrease of 50-75% in road transport activity
and up to 95% in rush-hour traffic congestion in major cities. Road vehicles are a major
source of nitrogen dioxide (NO2) in cities. There were many recorded declines in
NO2 concentrations, probably due to the lockdowns (Figure 1.3). For example, average
NO2 concentrations in Milan were around 17% lower during the two week period after
the start of its lockdown than during the two weeks before. The most polluted cities
saw some of the biggest improvements in overall air quality: in New Delhi a major
reduction in rush-hour traffic congestion during the first weeks of lockdown coincided
with a 66% drop in NO2. Cities in the People’s Republic of China (hereafter China) and
India also recorded reductions in sulfur oxide (SOX) concentrations as industrial
activities were curtailed.

IEA. All rights reserved

The impact of lockdowns on levels of PM2.5 is not as clear-cut. Road traffic typically
accounts for less than a third of PM2.5 emissions. The majority of PM2.5 emissions come
from other sources such as industrial activity, space heating in buildings and agriculture.
Therefore the impact of reduced road traffic on PM2.5 emissions is likely to be smaller
than on NO2 emissions. Local weather conditions can also drive large fluctuations in NO2
and PM2.5 concentrations, making it hard to see the effects of the relatively small
reductions in PM2.5 emissions in concentration levels. For example, in New Delhi and
Paris there were marked increases in average concentrations of PM2.5 during the two
weeks after lockdown compared to the previous two weeks, while in Milan there was
little significant change. This underlines the need for efforts to reduce PM2.5 in line with
the UN Sustainable Development Goal 3.9 to be wide ranging.
After the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) outbreak in 2003 it was shown
that previous exposure to air pollution dramatically increased the risk of death (Cui
et al., 2003). Although a connection between air pollution and mortality rates from
Covid-19 has yet to be established, several recent studies have pointed towards a link
between areas of high pollution and high death rates (Conticini, Frediani and Caro,
2020). In northern Italy, which has some of the highest concentrations of PM2.5 in
Europe, death rates from Covid-19 are markedly higher than in the rest of the country.
Causation, however, is difficult to establish: other factors such as demographics and
population density may be important. There may also be a connection between the
likelihood of becoming infected with Covid-19 and levels of particulate matter pollution,
as one preliminary study reports that the Covid-19 virus has been found attached to
samples of micro-particulate pollutants (Setti et al., 2020).

Chapter 1 | Covid-19 and energy: setting the scene

23

1

Figure 1.3 ⊳

Change in air quality index and rush-hour traffic congestion
before and after lockdowns in selected cities

50%

Congestion
PM2.5
NO₂

0%

-50%

-100%

New Delhi

Milan

Bangkok

New York

Paris

Changes in air quality between the weeks before and after lockdowns only partially
reflect decreased congestion as most PM2.5 emissions do not come from road vehicles.
Notes: Rush-hour traffic congestion refers to the expected percentage increase in travel time compared
to free-flow conditions on an average Monday at 09:00. Change in traffic congestion 2019 annual
average versus April 2020.
Source: IEA analysis based on TomTom International (2020).

1.3.1

Energy sector investment

IEA. All rights reserved

Volatile commodity prices and suppressed energy demand will leave many energy
companies with weakened financial positions and strained balance sheets. As a result,
spending has been reined in, project workers have been confined to their homes, planned
investments have been delayed, deferred or shelved and supply chains have been
disrupted. We expect that investment in the energy sector in 2020 will experience its
largest decline on record with a reduction of one-fifth – almost $400 billion – in capital
spending compared with 2019 (IEA, 2020d).
The oil and gas sector has experienced the largest reduction in investment of any energy
sector as a result of diminished revenues that reflect less demand and lower prices, and
uncertainties about future prospects. We estimate a decline in oil and gas investment in
2020 of around one-third compared with 2019. The power sector has been less exposed to
price volatility, and cuts in investment announced by companies are lower, yet we estimate
a drop of 10% in capital spending. Investment in renewable energy has been relatively
resilient, compared with fossil fuels, but is still set to fall by around 10%. In addition, sharp
reductions in vehicle sales, construction and industrial activity are set to stall progress in
improving energy efficiency.

24

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

The share of investment in low-carbon technologies (such as renewables, efficiency,
nuclear, carbon capture, utilisation and storage [CCUS]) has held at around one-third of
total energy sector investment in recent years. It is likely to jump towards 40% in 2020, but
only because investment in fossil fuels is set to drop sharply. In absolute terms, it remains
far below the levels that would be required to accelerate clean energy transitions
(Figure 1.4). The IEA’s Sustainable Development Scenario 3 sees annual investment in
electricity networks in the 2025-30 period that is around 50% above the level seen in 2019,
and annual investment in power from renewables that is around 90% higher.

Billion dollars

Figure 1.4 ⊳

Energy sector investment in 2019 and 2020e, and annual
average investment in the Sustainable Development Scenario
Fuel supply

1 200

Power sector

1 000
800
600
400
200
2019
Oil
Coal

2020e

2025-30*

Gas
Biofuel and biogas

2019

2020e

Renewable power
Nuclear

2025-30*

Fossil fuel power
Electricity networks

Investment levels have dropped across the board, especially in oil and gas. Power sector
investments are at half the levels seen in the Sustainable Development Scenario.
* Annual average in the Sustainable Development Scenario. Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
Source: IEA (2020d).

1.3.2

Jobs in the energy sector

The energy industry 4 is a major employer that directly employed around 40 million people
around the world in 2019. Of these, around 17 million worked in electricity generation and
networks, and around 20 million in the production, transport and distribution of fossil fuels,
and a further 3 million in the production, transport and distribution of bioenergy
(Figure 1.5).
3 The Sustainable Development Scenario sets out a pathway for the development of the global energy sector

IEA. All rights reserved

consistent with the goals of the Paris Agreement and UN Sustainable Development Goals related to air
pollution and energy access (IEA, 2019b).
4 The “energy industry” encompasses all supply of fuels to end-uses, including the production,
transformation and provision of solid, liquid and gaseous fuels to consumers, together with the power
sector, including the operation, development and manufacturing of power generation technologies,
networks and storage.

Chapter 1 | Covid-19 and energy: setting the scene

25

1

Figure 1.5 ⊳

Energy sector, energy efficiency and vehicle manufacturing jobs
at risk post Covid-19 and share of total sector employment

0.5

1.0

1.5

Million jobs
2.0

4%

8%

12%

16%

Vehicle manufacturing
Energy efficiency
Bioenergy
Electricity
Coal
Oil and gas

Jobs at structural risk

Share of sector employment (bottom axis)

Fossil fuels, bioenergy and vehicle manufacturing have the highest share of jobs at risk. Oil
and gas, energy efficiency and vehicles have the largest gross number of jobs at risk.

Of the roughly 17 million people working in electricity generation and networks, nearly
12 million were employed in electricity generation in 2019, with around 30% of those
involved in the operation and maintenance of existing plants, and the remainder involved
in the building of new power plants (including construction and manufacturing activities).
The solar industry is the largest employer in the power sector, with over 3 million
employed, mainly in manufacturing and construction, followed by employment in coal at
roughly 2.5 million, hydropower at 2 million and wind at about 1 million. Electricity
networks employed around 5 million globally, with roughly a quarter of jobs in transmission
and three-quarters in distribution. About 90% of those jobs are in utilities and related
projects, and around 10% are associated with equipment manufacturers.

IEA. All rights reserved

Of the roughly 20 million people working in fossil fuel industries, the oil and gas sector
employed over 13 million people in 2019, with around 5 million of those working in oil field
services, the market segment impacted the most by low prices. Coal extraction, processing
and delivery employed roughly 6.5 million globally in 2019. Coal mining, particularly in
China and India, employs a large number of unskilled labourers in low-income regions, and
the industry is an important element of socio-economic stability in these regions.
Economy-wide labour hours are expected to be down 10.5% in the second-quarter 2020
due to Covid-19, the equivalent of 305 million full-time jobs (ILO, 2020). We estimate
around 6 million jobs across the energy sector, energy efficiency and vehicle manufacturing
have been lost or are at risk of being permanently lost due to Covid-19 impacts. 5 Jobs in
5 These estimates reflect neither those jobs likely to resume after furlough measures nor lost labour wages
associated with lockdowns.

26

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

fossil fuel industries are likely to be hardest hit due to sustained low prices, especially in oil
and gas, where more than 1.2 million job losses are expected in upstream operations.
Global employment in coal, which has already been on a downward trend in recent years,
could drop by around a further 0.7 million jobs, driven primarily by decreasing demand for
coal in the power sector and fuel switching to low price natural gas.
Jobs in operating power plants and networks are likely to be less affected, as electricity
demand is expected to return more quickly and since electricity grids have to continue to
operate reliably. The majority of power sector job losses are related to expected declines in
new investment for generation and grid projects. Many projects currently on hold are
expected to resume after lockdown measures are lifted, but some face being postponed
until electricity demand increases. Developers and manufacturers in both power
generation and networks are bracing for a decreased pipeline of new projects in the
coming years; around 0.6 million jobs have already been lost or are at risk in the longer
term.
The transport sector and energy efficiency have significant impacts on improvements in
energy intensity; both are expected to see sharp job losses due to the pandemic. We
estimate that around 1.3 million jobs in energy efficiency are at risk worldwide, primarily in
construction associated with retrofits and manufacturing of efficient appliances.
Automobile and parts manufacturers employ around 13 million globally, including contract
workers, with alternative fuel vehicles representing roughly 10% of total employment. Car
sales are expected to decline by 15% in 2020, with the decrease in sales being most
pronounced for efficient internal combustion engine vehicles, and more moderate declines
for alternative fuel vehicles, in particular electric vehicles (EVs) (IEA, 2020e). Aviation
directly employs 6 about 10 million people worldwide of which about 1.2 million are in civil
aerospace, where fewer orders for new planes will decrease jobs and slow improvements
in fleet efficiency (IATA, 2020).

IEA. All rights reserved

Sustaining and creating employment is a major priority for policy makers and is
fundamental for economic recovery. To provide a full understanding of the implications
and design of recovery packages, we have undertaken a new global analysis of jobs in the
energy sector. This analysis was conducted by energy sectors and by regions, and estimates
pre-pandemic employment, potential job losses and the job creation potential of various
investments targeted in stimulus measures. This analysis is discussed at length in
Chapters 2 and 3. (For more information on the detailed jobs analysis conducted for this
report and its methodology, please refer to Annex A.)

6 This

includes airport operators, airlines, civil aerospace (the design, manufacturing and testing of
aeroplanes) and air navigation service providers.

Chapter 1 | Covid-19 and energy: setting the scene

27

1

1.4

How should governments respond?

While significant uncertainty lingers on the length, depth and impacts of the Covid-19 crisis,
there is a broad consensus on the need for well-designed packages of measures that will
support economic recovery. The pandemic is global and its impacts – though uneven – are
global too. This suggests that packages of measures are likely to be more effective if they
involve some elements of international co-operation.
Emergency financial and economic support measures in

Financial system stability
Ease in implementation of fiscal rule, flexibility within accounting
and prudential rules, central bank intervention.

United States

Southeast Asia

South Africa

Japan

Saudi Arabia

India

European Union

China

selected countries and regions (as of 4 June 2020)

Brazil

Table 1.1 ⊳

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

Social measures
Emergency safety net for vulnerable households
Government loans, direct payments, tax cuts/deferral,
extension of rent/mortgage payment deadlines, food assistance.

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

Emergency safety net for workers
Enhanced/extended unemployment insurance/wage subsidies.

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●

Business support

● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●
● ● ●
●
● ●
● ● ●
●
● ●

Direct tax rebates
Liquidity provisions for SMEs
Loans, credit guarantees.
Forbearance (debt, tax, bills)
Support to exporters
Bailouts, grants and/or subsidies

IEA. All rights reserved

Energy sector support
Public investment/support for ongoing projects; government
loans and bailouts for energy companies and targeted support for
their workers; purchase of oil stocks; energy access measures.

● ● ● ●

● ● ●

Notes: Prudential rules = regulations requiring that financial firms maintain adequate capital and have
appropriate risk controls in place. SMEs = small and medium enterprises. Data for the European Union and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) encompass measures taken at member state level as
well as at the regional association level. As of 11 May 2020, the Saudi Arabian government had announced
fiscal consolidation measures (increased consumption tax, suspension of a cost-of-living allowance for civil
servants).
Sources: IEA analysis based on official communications, as compiled in the OECD Country Policy Tracker; IMF
Policy Responses to Covid-19; Gentilini et al. (2020).

28

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Many governments remain primarily focussed on emergency relief packages that target the
health sector, as well as on maintaining financial stability and providing emergency support
to households and businesses (Table 1.1). In response to the pandemic, many countries
implemented some form of health and containment measures, although these differed in
scope and duration. Around one-third of the global population was subject to complete or
partial lockdowns in mid-May 2020, and nearly the entire global workforce was affected by
some form of containment measure.
Social protection measures have been implemented or extended in about 160 countries
and form the bulk of short-term policy responses (Gentilini et al., 2020). Wage subsidies are
among the most common measures, and many governments are going beyond formal
employment support to provide explicit help to informal workers. Argentina, Brazil,
Ecuador, Egypt, India, Morocco, the Philippines and the United States are among the
countries providing social assistance through cash transfers.
Many governments have also provided financial and regulatory support to small and
medium enterprises (SMEs), as many of these are facing liquidity stress and solvency
concerns. SMEs account for around 70% of total employment in OECD countries, and
around 45% in emerging economies (OECD, 2017). Emergency response measures in many
countries are also targeting sectors identified as particularly exposed or as strategically
important: in some countries this has led to support for industries such as aviation and
vehicle manufacturing.
The scope, orientation and duration of current emergency social and economic plans vary
widely by country. They depend not only on the local severity of the health crisis and its
impact, but also on fiscal policies and social and economic structures. Different national
challenges mean that governments have chosen various responses tailored to their
particular circumstances.

IEA. All rights reserved

It is difficult to compare the precise sums of money that have been committed to support
schemes across countries and regions, but existing plans, in terms of fiscal measures, are
estimated to represent between -3% and 21% of countries' GDP (Figure 1.6), corresponding
to around seven trillion dollars for G20 countries in total. At a global level, recent appraisals
show that the total amount spent on fiscal measures is about nine trillion dollars
(Battersby, Lam and Ture, 2020). Some of these emergency measures will have an influence
in the longer term. However, as this report went to press, only a handful of governments
had announced intentions to implement medium-term plans beyond the immediate
economic and financial relief measures.

Chapter 1 | Covid-19 and energy: setting the scene

29

1

Emergency fiscal measures announced by G20 countries in

Figure 1.6 ⊳

response to the Covid-19 crisis
Billion dollars (2019)
- 500

0

500

1 000 1 500 2 000 2 500 3 000 3 500

Argentina
Australia
Brazil
Canada
China
France
Germany
India
Indonesia
Italy
Japan
Mexico
Russia
Saudi Arabia
South Africa
Korea
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States
-5%

Package
Share of GDP
(bottom axis)

0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

30%

In G20 countries, emergency fiscal measures vary between -3% and 21% of GDP
– similar to the large variation of final recovery plans after the 2008-09 financial crisis.
Notes: Includes measures announced to 7 June 2020. US dollars are presented in 2019 purchasing power
parities. GDP is expressed in real terms. In Saudi Arabia, fiscal consolidation measures correspond to a net
negative package.
Sources: IEA analysis based on Elgin, Basburg and Yalaman (2020); IILS (2011).

1.4.1

How the energy sector features in announced emergency and
recovery plans

IEA. All rights reserved

So far, the energy sector features in a number of emergency plans, although not as a
primary target. These energy-related measures can be clustered into three key areas.
Focus on energy security and opportunities provided by lower prices. Some governments
have seen an opportunity in the recent low market prices to boost strategic oil reserves,
with longer term benefits for global energy security, or to take other actions. The Australian
government, for example, has agreed to buy capacity in the US Strategic Petroleum
Reserve. The Indian government increased excise duties on petrol in order to generate
public revenues earmarked for post Covid crisis recovery.

30

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Revising or reaffirming commitments to clean energy transitions. In the context of
responding to the crisis, a number of countries in the European Union are implementing or
considering measures to accelerate clean energy transitions. The Netherlands has
continued with legislative processes for the implementation of national carbon taxes and,
along with Spain, has reasserted commitments to achieve climate change targets. Germany
announced a series of measures incorporating purchase incentives for electric and hybrid
vehicles, financial support for charging stations and battery production and public
investment to expand the production of low-carbon hydrogen. Austria and Sweden have
completed their phase-out of coal power generation ahead of schedule. Denmark has set
out plans to invest heavily in energy efficiency improvements in social housing and to build
two artificial islands for energy purposes and target a minimum combined 4 gigawatts (GW)
of offshore wind capacity by 2030. The European Commission’s proposal for a new
€750 billion recovery instrument aims to support member states to accelerate clean energy
transitions.

IEA. All rights reserved

In the United Kingdom, budgetary plans set out in March include provisions to enable the
funding of at least two carbon capture storage clusters by 2030. In Korea, the government’s
recovery plans encompass a number of measures that aim to achieve a net zero
greenhouse gas emissions target in 2050, ranging from investments in renewable energy
sources to the introduction of a carbon tax and targeted support for fossil fuel industry
workers transitioning to other sectors. In China, plans and objectives announced during the
convening of the National People's Congress in May 2020 include additional investments in
electric and fuel cell vehicles, as well as in new infrastructure supporting digitalisation, EV
charging stations and ultra-high electricity transmission. China’s government extended
financial support that had been set to expire at the end of 2020 to 2022 to cushion the
impacts of the Covid-19 epidemic on new EV markets.
A number of countries have confirmed or extended their support for clean energy projects.
In France, deadlines for contracting and grid connection for project developers were
extended, and the level of feed-in-tariffs was frozen to accommodate delays due to supply
chain disruptions or labour constraints. The Portuguese government has confirmed its
intention to start the construction of a 1 GW solar-powered hydrogen plant in the coming
year. The UK government has maintained the original timetable for wind auctions, and is
continuing public consultations on its proposed support scheme for biomethane injection
into the grid. In India, the government listed renewable energy installations as essential
services, allowing the workforce to continue operations as needed. In Indonesia, the
government has reconfirmed its plan to enact a new regulation on renewable energy that
had been announced before the epidemic. A number of governments have also defined
climate change or environmental conditions for access to public support. For instance, in
Canada authorities have included annual environmental planning and reporting
requirements among the conditions that large firms will need to meet in order to qualify
for its emergency loan programme. They also announced funding for the decommissioning
of inactive and orphan wells in three provinces, as well as a fund to support the oil and gas
Chapter 1 | Covid-19 and energy: setting the scene

31

1

sector in reducing methane emissions. The Austrian and French governments, among
others, have signalled a willingness to link airline bailouts to environmental conditions.
At the same time, however, some countries have chosen to delay a number of decisions
related to clean energy transitions. For example renewable energy auction schedules have
been subject to partial or full postponement in Chile, China, France, Germany, Ireland and
Portugal. In Brazil, where power sector auctions have also been postponed, the flagship
policy to enhance biofuel targets in its transport sector may be adjusted in a way that
affects planned reductions in CO2 emissions.
Creating safety nets for companies and consumers. A number of governments have
introduced measures to defer energy bills or provide other support for vulnerable
households and businesses. In Togo, for example, households with “solar home” systems
operated by private companies participating in the national electrification programme have
been offered free services and payment deferrals. Governments are also implementing
measures to help utility companies. In Brazil, tariff revision cycles have been suspended to
avoid increases in consumer prices, and funds have been provided to improve power sector
liquidity and to help utilities provide consumer subsidies. Liquidity injections and stateguaranteed loans have also been provided to electricity distribution companies in India. As
part of wider responses to support heavy industries, some governments have implemented
specific support measures for the oil and gas sector, notably in the form of loans in the
United States.

1.4.2

Lessons from the 2008-09 financial crisis for stimulus spending on
clean energy technologies

IEA. All rights reserved

The current economic crisis differs in a number of ways from the financial crisis in 2008-09,
and the ways in which countries respond will also differ. There are, nonetheless, some
useful lessons to be drawn from analysing the results of the energy-related spending and
support for clean energy technology in recovery plans launched in the wake of the 2008-09
global financial crisis.
While definitions of what constituted clean energy in the 2008-09 packages vary, policies
targeting renewable energy generation, energy efficiency in buildings, scrappage payments
for vehicles with low fuel efficiency, clean technology development support, mass transit,
nature conservation and water resource management were then estimated to account for
around 16% of the total global stimulus measures, totalling over half a trillion dollars
(Agrawala, Dussaux and Monti, 2020). Although global clean energy investment in 2008-09
helped to unlock growth in wind and solar photovoltaic (PV) technologies, and to improve
the resilience of gas and electricity networks, the overall recovery from the financial crisis
generally was carbon intensive. Following an initial decline in emissions of 0.4 Gt CO2 in
2009, emissions rebounded by 1.7 Gt CO2 in 2010.
It is difficult to measure the overall effectiveness of these energy-related funds. But to take
one example, spending by European Union member countries on clean energy measures
32

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

included investment in energy efficiency, transport infrastructure, vehicle scrappage
schemes, renewables and innovation. Spending on these specific measures, estimated on
average to have cost around 0.3% of GDP, provided a boost to GDP at a national level of
around 0.6 - 1.1%, depending on the level of ambition in each country, and as much as 1.5%
at a European Union level (Cambridge Econometrics, 2011). This was in the context of a
0.1% decrease in global GDP during the financial crisis, with G7 countries 7 recording an
average decline of 3% (IMF, 2020b).

IEA. All rights reserved

Some of the key lessons from the financial crisis in 2008-09 for stimulus spending on clean
energy include:


Scaling up successful existing policies usually delivers the biggest economic and
employment returns. The two policies that significantly increased renewable energy
investment in Europe and the United States pre-dated the crisis, but were then
boosted in scope and ambition as a response to the economic crisis. At one stage in
2010, the US government was providing as much project financing for renewables as
the ten-largest private green investment funds combined (Mundaca and Richter,
2015). Large-scale programmes used well-known, standardised technologies and
deployment approaches, for example to improve energy efficiency in industrial energy
use in China. In Germany, funding allocated to energy efficiency in public buildings
significantly exceeded previous investment levels. While the use of existing policy
structures helped with the efficient roll out of large fiscal and investment programmes,
the size, speed and choice of policy instruments led to challenges in some cases. In
China, for example, reliance on rapid investment driven growth led to a surge in local
government debt and to inflation in land and housing markets (Wong, 2011).



Technology readiness is critical. Clean energy stimulus investment provided strong
support for wind and solar PV in 2009, creating positive feedback loops and cost
declines. In the United States there was strong support for research and development
for lithium-ion battery storage systems and for electric vehicles which led to
accelerated cost reductions and improved standardisation of EVs and grid storage.
However, a lack of sufficient maturity in 2009, combined with prevailing market
conditions (in particular an oil price crash), meant that stimulus funding for
technologies such as advanced biofuels and hydrogen did not lead to a material
increase in manufacturing capacity.



Large infrastructure projects require careful appraisal and management if they are to
fulfil expectations. Policy makers in 2008 identified energy infrastructure as a
promising area for stimulus in part because of its large macroeconomic multiplier
impact. While this helped the development of some clean energy infrastructure, it also
led to the allocation of funding to projects that never got built, often because of
complex licensing procedures (for example long-distance direct current transmission
lines in the United States) or an inability to get the projects co-funded and off-the-

7 G7 countries are Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom and United States.

Chapter 1 | Covid-19 and energy: setting the scene

33

1

ground within the required timeframe (for example, CCUS projects in the power sector
in the United States and Europe).


Stimulus spending on clean energy is most effective when synchronised with
training. Experience from the United States shows that the deployment of clean
energy technology is labour intensive, and that a critical success factor is including
targeted education and training in programme deployment from a very early stage.
Timely training (or re-training) enables workers to develop the skills needed to be
ready for employment when projects are deployed (Mundaca and Richter, 2015).



Stimulus funding is most effective when it is aligned with long-term price signals.
Some large low-carbon projects receiving significant public investment struggled to
attract private funding due to the absence of clear, long-term price signals, such as
carbon prices. Following the 2008-09 financial crisis, legislative efforts to introduce an
emissions trading system in the United States were abandoned, while allowance prices
in the European Union Emissions Trading System remained very low. This meant that
the business case for investments such as CCUS was difficult to maintain.

1.4.3

Why is a sustainable recovery plan needed for the energy sector?

Energy has not featured prominently in the Covid-19 recovery packages proposed to date.
Yet the magnitude of this crisis, as well as lessons from the 2008-09 financial crisis,
combined with the long-term current trajectory of global CO2 emissions all lend credence to
the case for heightening attention to the energy sector in the next phases of recovery and
stimulus programmes.
Investment in energy can sustain and boost employment while helping to deliver affordable
and reliable energy and to improve the resilience of energy systems. This in turn helps to
support higher employment and activity levels in all parts of the economy. Investment in
energy measures therefore can induce indirect economic benefits which extend far beyond
the energy sector.
Furthermore, investment in energy is needed if there is to be a structural reorientation of
the global energy sector that enables countries to meet their long-term goals on climate
change, energy access and sustainability.

IEA. All rights reserved

While the Covid-19 crisis could in some ways hamper efforts to develop cleaner and more
resilient energy economies, in other ways it could bolster these efforts. It has, for example,
led to:


A focus on the urgent need to restore existing jobs and create new ones. The massive
unemployment rates around the world make labour-intensive projects that also boost
the productive capacity of the economy attractive components in economic recovery
and stimulus packages. Some measures in the energy sector would be excellent
candidates in terms of job creation. However there is a risk that measures that are not
sufficiently labour intensive (such as spending on electricity networks) may receive less

34

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

IEA. All rights reserved

attention, even though they could make an important contribution to improving longterm resilience and sustainability.


Changes in the monetary environment. Central banks are responding to the Covid-19
crisis by lowering interest rates and increasing quantitative easing programmes. This
means that the cost of capital in many regions has fallen, which improves the
economics of new capital-intensive projects such as large-scale infrastructure.
However, there has also been a large increase in capital outflows from many
developing economies, where monetary action is not always easy to take, private
sector co-financing ability is limited and government borrowing capacity on
international markets is constrained. As a result, it may be difficult for some
developing countries to undertake large-scale investment programmes.



Volatility in fossil fuel markets. The recent large drop in oil demand has led to
extreme oil price volatility. This has had negative consequences for key producer
economies as well as for many companies: while this highlights the need for many of
these countries to diversify their sources of revenue, it simultaneously makes the
process of reform more challenging to implement. Natural gas prices have also fallen,
which is helping the economics of coal-to-gas switching, but, at the same time, is
making some efficiency measures less cost-effective.



Heightened awareness of the benefits of clean and secure energy. Air pollution in
cities, largely linked to road transport and to oil and coal use, has major implications
for health, and is a possible contributory factor in Covid-19-related mortality.
Significant improvements in air quality during the lockdown period have underlined
how much air pollution there normally is in many cities. Meanwhile more than 4 billion
people have spent time in lockdown, with many working from home and homeschooling, underlining the vital importance of reliable electricity supplies.



The possibility of lasting changes to the way people behave. Some of the changes to
behavioural patterns originally brought about by the Covid-19 lockdowns could
continue to some extent after the immediate crisis has waned. Working from home
could become more common, reducing commuter journeys and potentially reducing
air pollution in cities. Conversely, due to perceived health risks, there might also be
some lasting reluctance to use public transport, making it harder and slower to reduce
air pollution and decarbonise transport.

Chapter 1 | Covid-19 and energy: setting the scene

35

1

IEA. All rights reserved

Chapter 2
Evaluation of possible recovery measures
S U M M A R Y
• This chapter assesses a menu of over 30 energy-related measures for key sectors
that policy makers could consider as part of a plan to boost growth and create new
jobs while building a more sustainable and resilient energy sector. For each measure
we examine the impacts of the Covid-19 crisis on the sector, job creation potential,
cost effectiveness, and CO2 emissions reduction potential. We also suggest specific
policies for consideration. The assessments set out in this chapter form the building
blocks for a sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector: this plan is set out in
Chapter 3. The chapter covers the following sectors:

• Electricity: A range of measures could be put in place to support the expansion and
modernisation of electricity grids; accelerate new wind and solar installations and
repower existing ones; maintain the role of hydro and nuclear power, mainly by
preserving existing facilities; and manage gas- and coal-fired generation. Each option
has the potential to create 1-14 jobs per million dollars invested, and would have
very different impacts on energy resilience and sustainability.

• Transport: Car sales are expected to drop by around 15% globally in 2020.
Government support through schemes such as “cash-for-clunkers” could reduce job
losses, boost the efficiency of the vehicle fleet and promote the use of electric cars.
Investment in high-speed rail and urban transport – ranging from walking and
cycling infrastructure, electric vehicle recharging and mass transport – has
significant job creation potential, would reduce local air pollution and help shift
future transport patterns.

• Buildings: Measures to improve the efficiency of buildings and appliances could be
implemented quickly, in some cases have very short payback periods and would
create 10-15 jobs per million dollars invested. In low-income countries, over
2.5 billion people still lack access to clean cooking. Low LPG prices make providing
access attractive, with payback periods of just one year, plus substantial job creation
potential.

• Industry: One-in-four jobs are in industry, and the Covid-19 pandemic has
disproportionately hit small and medium industrial enterprises. Investing in energy
efficiency, notably motors and agricultural pumps, and recycling would create
around 10 and 18 million jobs per million dollars invested respectively.

IEA. All rights reserved

• Fuels: Investment to reduce methane emissions could mitigate some job losses in
the oil and gas sector while cost effectively reducing GHG emissions. The current
period of low oil and gas prices provides fertile ground for renewed efforts to phase
out fossil fuel subsidies. The biofuels sector is being hit hard by Covid-19: supporting
growth in sustainable biofuels could create around 15-30 jobs per million dollars
invested.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

37

• Innovation: Technology innovation plays a crucial role in improving future energy
systems, and innovation in hydrogen, batteries, small modular nuclear reactors and
carbon capture, utilisation and storage could bring enormous long-term
sustainability and resilience benefits while creating 3-8 new jobs per million dollars
invested.

2.1

Introduction

The fallout from the Covid-19 pandemic means that there is an urgent need for significant
levels of investment in the energy sector to sustain and boost employment, boost
economic growth, and improve future sustainability and resilience. Investment decisions
made now will impact the ways in which energy is produced and consumed for decades,
and they therefore need to be aligned with long-term national and global objectives.
This chapter explores a range of energy-related measures that countries may wish to
consider adopting (Table 2.1). These measures do not cover every option: we have had to
be selective. Where possible we quantify the impact of investing 1 million dollars on job
creation; we also look at greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, energy security and resilience,
and how these factors may vary by region. When we look at job creation, we consider both
jobs that would be created by spending on the measure and the jobs that could be lost as a
result of the Covid-19 crisis. We also provide an overview of selected policies for each
measure.

IEA. All rights reserved

Table 2.1 ⊳

Energy sector measures analysed

Sector

Measure

Electricity

• Expand and modernise grids
• Accelerate the growth of wind and solar PV
• Maintain the role of hydro and nuclear power
• Manage gas- and coal-fired power generation

Transport

• New vehicles
• Expand high-speed rail networks
• Improve urban infrastructure

Buildings

• Retrofit existing buildings and more efficient new constructions
• More efficient and connected household appliances
• Improve access to clean cooking

Industry

• Improve energy efficiency and increase electrification
• Expand waste and material recycling

Fuels

• Reduce methane emissions from oil and gas operations
• Reform fossil fuel subsidies
• Support and expand the use of biofuels

Strategic opportunities in
technology innovation

• Hydrogen technologies
• Batteries
• Small modular nuclear reactors
• Carbon capture, utilisation and storage

38

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

The assessments in this chapter provide the buildings blocks for an integrated recovery
plan. Chapter 3 sets out a sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector that draws on
these assessments: it also sets out and explains the criteria that determine the inclusion of
the measures in the plan.

2.1.1

Overview of findings on jobs and emissions

Job creation

2

1

To standardise the comparison of employment creation, we have developed employment
multipliers for the various measures based on the gross number of jobs that would be
produced for every million dollars of spending. These numbers represent global weighted
averages for the gross direct and indirect jobs created by the spending. Jobs that may be
induced (or lost) by the subsequent spending (or saving) of the new workers are not
included.
Figure 2.1 is divided into two types of measures: long-lived infrastructure, where jobs are
given per million dollars of capital investment from government or private sources; and
spending on final demand of energy or energy devices, where jobs are given per million
dollars spent on final products.
Employment multipliers for a given technology can vary substantially between regions. Low
employment multipliers are typically associated with sectors with higher wages and with
relatively complex, capital-intensive projects. High multipliers are typically associated with
measures that employ a larger number of lower wage workers and measures where
material costs represent a smaller share of project costs. Since the multipliers are global
weighted averages, measures that are primarily deployed in countries with lower average
wages and lower labour efficiency have higher multipliers. Figure 2.1 provides the global
average estimates: further detail and ranges across regions are provided in the individual
sector discussions in the following sections.
The employment multipliers discussed in this chapter include only the jobs directly involved
in the delivery of the measure and paid for by each million dollars of investment or
spending, such as those in manufacturing, construction, sales and production. Most of
these jobs would be created quickly but would only last as long as it takes for the relevant
work to be completed.

IEA. All rights reserved

For investment measures, energy efficiency in buildings and industry together with solar
PV create the most jobs per million dollars of investment: on average, these three
measures create between 10-15 jobs for every million dollars. Energy efficiency measures
tend to be labour intensive, and the jobs involved tend to pay relatively low average wages,
while the rapid cost reductions in solar photovoltaic (PV) in recent years means that labour

1 Details on definitions and methods for developing employment figures and employment multipliers are
given in Annex A.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

39

Figure 2.1 ⊳

Construction and manufacturing jobs created per million dollars
of capital investment and spending by measure
Per million dollars of capital investment
New grids
Existing grids
New hydro
New nuclear
Wind power
Solar PV

Unabated coal-fired power
Unabated gas-fired power
Hydrogen production
CCUS
Reduce methane emissions
Urban transport infrastructure
High-speed rail
Buildings efficiency retrofit
Efficient new buildings
Industry efficiency
5
Construction

Manufacturing

10
15
Jobs per million dollars
Total

Rest of world

Advanced
economies

Per million dollars of spending
New vehicles
Appliances
Batteries
Biofuels
Recycling
New vehicles
Appliances
Batteries
Biofuels
Clean cooking (LPG)
Recycling
10

20

Transport

Buildings

30

40
50
Jobs per million dollars
Innovation
Fuels
Industry

IEA. All rights reserved

Efficiency, solar PV and grids create some of the largest numbers of jobs per unit of
investment, alongside spending on recycling and biofuels.
Note: CCUS = carbon capture, utilisation and storage; LPG = liquefied petroleum gas.

40

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

now represents a much larger portion of total costs than was the case in the past. Large
projects such as electricity grids and centralised power plants provide between 1-7 jobs per
million dollars of capital investment. Building new grids and maintaining existing ones are
at the higher end of this range because of the need to construct systems such as
transmission towers and power lines; wind and new hydro or nuclear power are at the
lower end of the range. Developing economies account for a large share of current
investment in nuclear, hydro and coal power, as well as new grids: these regions tend to
have lower cost labour, raising the multipliers for these technologies slightly.
For spending measures, recycling and biofuels have the highest multipliers because of the
labour intensity of processing feedstocks. Growth for both of these industries is fastest in
developing markets, which tend to have a large informal economy and relatively low wages
in the formal economy. Measures relating to new vehicles, batteries, and appliances
typically create 6-9 jobs per million dollars of spending in advanced economies: a high
degree of automation however means that manufacturers contribute less to overall
employment than the suppliers who provide the materials they use. Manufacturing jobs in
advanced economies on average pay higher wages than is the case elsewhere, while lessautomated processes in developing economies may require more workers to produce the
same output.
New long-lived infrastructure or assets created by investment require continuing operation
and maintenance (O&M). Sustaining these O&M jobs would require spending by the wider
market or project beneficiaries that is additional to the initial capital investment or
consumer spending. We therefore discuss these O&M jobs separately. Other important
issues include are how quickly the jobs can be created, job location, and the skill sets
required: these factors are also discussed within each sector.

Abatement costs

IEA. All rights reserved

Abatement costs show for each measure the cost or savings associated with reducing
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 1 tonne of carbon dioxide (CO2) equivalent. 2 This is
based on the lifetime cost of deploying the measure and the savings that would accrue to
the consumer (both discounted to the present based on sector- and region-specific
discount rates) divided by the cumulative CO2 emissions savings over the measure lifetime.
The costs and savings of the measures are given relative to a number of different base case
technologies. For example, for new energy efficient cars, the abatement costs are
compared with the cost of buying and operating a new internal combustion engine (ICE)
vehicle within each region; for appliances and retrofits, they are compared with the energy
cost of a standard inefficient appliance or of not undertaking the retrofit; for biofuels, they
are compared with the cost of gasoline.

2 We assume that 1 tonne of methane is equivalent to 30 tonnes of CO , which is the 100-year global
2
warming potential.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

41

2

Positive abatement costs mean that the measure would cost money to reduce emissions,
while negative abatement costs would reduce emissions while also saving money. A large
number of the energy efficiency measures in industry, buildings and transport save money
over their lifetime for consumers or industry while also reducing emissions. Extending the
lifetime of hydro and nuclear power plants, and installing new solar PV panels in some
regions, also have negative abatement costs. In oil and gas operations, the value of
captured methane emissions can sometimes be greater than the cost of deploying the
abatement measure (even though natural gas prices have fallen substantially in most
regions globally), meaning that some of these options also have negative abatement costs.
In contrast, a number of the measures that involve substituting for an existing fuel or
technology (for example by switching to biofuels, or adding carbon capture, utilisation and
storage [CCUS] to a coal-fired power plant) would reduce emissions but would also entail
additional cost over their lifetimes.
Figure 2.2 ⊳

GHG abatement costs for selected measures

Hydro repower
Nuclear lifetime extensions
Wind power
Solar PV

20

Hybrid cars
Battery electric cars
Electric buses

15

Retrofits and efficient new builds
Efficient appliances
Clean cooking

10

Methane reductions
Biofuels
5

Industrial energy efficiency
Materials efficiency
Coal CCUS
- 200

- 100

0

100

IEA. All rights reserved

Global average

0
200
300
Dollars per tCO2 -eq

Many measures can reduce emissions and save money; yet there is a wide range of
abatement costs for measures, reflecting regional and technology characteristics.
Note: CCUS = carbon capture, utilisation and storage; tCO2 –eq = tonnes of carbon-dioxide equivalent.

42

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

There is a wide range of abatement costs for some of the measures, reflecting differences
between regions and technologies. The range of abatement costs for different regions and
various technologies within each of the measures is shown in Figure 2.2. Regions have
varying fuel prices (especially for gas and electricity), taxation regimes (e.g. on gasoline or
diesel), capacity factors (e.g. for solar PV and wind capacities), emission intensities of
electricity and country-specific characteristics. For example, abatement costs for electric
buses are positive in the United States because of its low tax levels on gasoline and diesel,
and its high power and range needs, meaning that larger batteries are required; abatement
costs are however negative in Europe, where countries tend to have relatively low
emissions intensity electricity and higher tax levels for gasoline and diesel, and where range
needs allow for smaller battery packs.

2.2

Electricity

The Covid-19 crisis reduced electricity demand by 20% or more in countries with full
lockdown measures (IEA, 2020a). The crisis has also reduced construction activities and
caused supply chain disruptions affecting all power generation technologies, as well as
transmission and distribution. Total power sector revenues are set to fall by around 7%
globally in 2020, mainly due to lower electricity demand. 3 Electricity retailers, power
generation and grid companies will share this burden. The electricity sector employed close
to 17 million people in 2019, with nearly 12 million jobs in electricity generation, and over
5 million jobs related to building, operating and maintaining electricity networks. More
than 4 million electricity sector jobs are in maintaining and operating power plants and
networks, the remainder are associated with construction and manufacturing.
Generators also face risks posed by depressed wholesale electricity prices. Negative prices
have occurred more often in markets across Europe and the United States, with the burden
falling mainly on coal, gas and nuclear power, despite the low operating costs of nuclear
power plants. Revenue for renewables has been more robust because of fixed price
contracts, low operating costs and priority access to grids. Financial concerns will create
pressures to reduce costs and may lead to a wave of layoffs for non-essential activities.
Early retirements of thermal power plants, including nuclear power, threaten thousands of
jobs, concentrated in Europe and the United States, while the loss of nuclear capacity will
hinder climate mitigation activities.

IEA. All rights reserved

We focus on four specific areas:
Expand and modernise grids: Grid-related measures could boost employment and deliver
many long-term advantages in terms of sustainability and resilience (Figure 2.3). Efficient
networks are the foundation of robust and secure power systems, and there is scope for
action to reduce high-cost disruptions, improve the integration of variable renewables, and
enable demand-side response and cross-border trade. In low-income countries,
3 Values presented for the year 2020 are estimates.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

43

2

modernising grids would enable a number of innovative energy services that support access
to electricity such as linking energy payments to mobile phones, installing local charging
stations and building mini- and micro-grids. Policy makers could stimulate grid investment
by raising borrowing limits, providing tax credits, expanding employee caps, streamlining
permitting processes and expanding training and skills conversion programmes.
Accelerate the growth of wind and solar PV: Wind and solar have shown a degree of
immunity to the Covid-19 crisis, and will be the only source of energy to grow in 2020,
although, new construction is set to decline by about 15% in 2020 (IEA, 2020b). Additional
solar PV and wind power could rapidly create a large number of jobs and cost effectively
reduce CO2 emissions, but this will require policy support. Auction schemes in recent years
have harnessed competitive forces while enabling lower cost financing: tools that reflect
market conditions and system costs will be increasingly important as wind and solar PV
expand their market shares. Repowering existing wind farms and distributed solar PV offer
the fastest avenues to invest capital rapidly into sustainable power generation
technologies.

Abatement costs ($ per tCO2)

Figure 2.3 ⊳

Job creation per million dollars of capital investment in power
generation technologies and average CO2 abatement costs

80

Efficient gas new

Hydro new
60
40
20

Nuclear new

Solar PV rooftop

Wind offshore
Wind onshore
repower
Wind onshore
new
0

Nuclear lifetime
extension

Delay to activity
Short
Moderate
Long

Solar PV utility

Hydro repower
5

10
15
Jobs created during construction phase

New solar PV and wind have low abatement costs, as do nuclear lifetime extensions and
repowering existing wind and hydro facilities; solar PV provides the largest boost to jobs.

IEA. All rights reserved

Note: Avoided CO2 emissions calculated based on displacing coal-fired generation, global averages shown.

Maintain the role of nuclear and hydro power: Hydropower and nuclear power are the
two largest sources of low-carbon generation today, together providing 70% of all lowcarbon electricity. They help reduce fossil fuel imports, improve electricity security by
adding to power system flexibility, and improve the affordability of electricity to
consumers. Many facilities are ageing and face financial challenges because of lower
revenues as a result of the crisis, heightening the risk of early retirements and limiting the
prospects for new investment. Modernising and upgrading existing hydropower facilities
44

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

and nuclear plants (for countries that intend to retain the option of nuclear power), would
avoid a steep decline in low-carbon electricity generation; new construction would further
boost low-carbon generation, and could also be considered where appropriate
Manage gas- and coal-fired power generation: Natural gas and coal have supported
economic development and electricity security for decades, though their roles are now
changing. Coal-fired power was under pressure even before the crisis, with lower electricity
demand and renewables growth leading to reduced utilisation rates and overcapacity in
major developing economies. With a major drop in gas prices in 2020, the economics of
coal-to-gas switching have now also improved. Nearly 130 gigawatts (GW) of coal-fired
capacity was under construction at the start of 2020 and a further 500 GW was in a
planning phase. While these projects could boost employment, they must be balanced
against commitments to reduce CO2 emissions and air pollution.

2.2.1

Expand and modernise grids

Electricity networks are the backbone of a secure and reliable power system: there are
nearly 7 million kilometres (km) of transmission lines and 72 million km of distribution lines
worldwide. Global investment in electricity networks (including sub-stations, switchgear,
metering, digital infrastructure and electric vehicle fast-chargers) was around $270 billion
in 2019, with distribution networks accounting for two-thirds of investment, and spending
on digital grids for 15%. Delays caused by lockdowns could affect project timelines in 2020,
particularly in developing economies: spending on grids is therefore likely to decline in the
absence of any targeted support.
Over five million people were employed globally in 2019 to construct, operate and maintain
electricity transmission and distribution networks, as well as to manufacture associated
equipment. The fall in electricity demand caused by the Covid-19 crisis has reduced
revenues for some network companies and placed them under strain. This is likely to make
it more difficult to finance future grid extensions and upgrades, putting at risk a significant
portion of the almost two million grid construction and manufacturing jobs worldwide.

Selected policy approaches

IEA. All rights reserved

Electricity networks are generally regulated businesses, and government policies to
maintain and develop agile, reliable and cost-effective electricity grids depend on the
circumstances of each country. Frameworks to encourage investments in grids are however
essential, and should incorporate clear long-term plan plans and strategies alongside a
stable regulatory framework. Transparent and efficient administrative procedures
(planning, permitting) which incorporate comprehensive engagement with stakeholders
are also essential. Working with network operators and the power sector, governments
could develop policies that encourage or require action to:


Expand and accelerate modernisation of existing grids, including through the roll-out
of digital infrastructure and smart grids. Possible ways of supporting this include
reforming planning and consenting procedures, increasing borrowing thresholds,

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

45

2

issuing tax credits or grants, expanding employee caps, encouraging training and skills
conversion programmes and investing in research, development and innovation.


Scale-up investment in new transmission and distribution infrastructure, including
cross-border interconnections, particularly where infrastructure has the necessary
planning consents. Tax credits, loan guarantees and simplified consenting processes
could help with this.



Accelerate the development of integrated planning to expand access to electricity in
many developing countries by means of both grid infrastructure and decentralised
systems (Box 2.1).

Box 2.1 ⊳

Supporting decentralised power technologies in
developing countries

Support for off-grid approaches will form an essential part of a national integrated
strategy to bring access to electricity to those who currently lack it (860 million people
in 2018). Mini-grids and stand-alone systems are the least-cost way of providing power
to more than half of those that lack access (IEA, 2019a). Decentralised solutions have
already provided access to essential energy services (lighting, telecommunications,
pumped water, cooling and cooking) to a larger number of people: around 15 million
people are connected to mini-grids in Africa (ESMAP, 2019), while around 18 million
solar home systems are currently in use, serving tens of millions of people
(ESMAP, 2020).

IEA. All rights reserved

The Covid-19 crisis has severely impacted progress on energy access, and lockdown
measures have put off-grid developments at risk. There are more than 1 000 firms in
developing countries in the off-gird sector, employing around 500 000 people. In many
countries, activities and sales have slowed or halted, and growing unemployment is
dampening the capacity of customers to find the finance for these essential systems.
Exempting solar components from duties and value-added taxes, removing diesel
subsidies, facilitating access to public or direct foreign investment, direct funding to
electrify health centres, and low-cost loans for large customers would be useful
measures to support off-grid solutions.
If sufficient action were taken to put the world on track for universal access to
electricity by 2030, we estimate that decentralised systems would create around
900 000 job-years within the next three years. Expansion would also provide major
socio-economic benefits for connected households: for example, households that
gained access to electricity could work longer days and expand their businesses. Every
100 solar home systems could generate the equivalent of 20 full-time induced jobs –
although mostly informal – with half of them for women (GOGLA, 2020). Such systems
would also help to improve the quality of health services and boost food security by
increasing agricultural productivity and the resilience of value chains.

46

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Economic implications
Grid investments are capital-intensive undertakings that require a diverse workforce
including line workers, engineers, and transmission, distribution and communication
technicians. Grid investments create jobs across a variety of roles during the construction
phase (engineers to plan and supervise the works, construction workers to erect the pylons
and poles, electricians and technicians to connect and wire households). They also create
manufacturing jobs, and a small number of long-term jobs in O&M. Job creation is higher
per unit of investment for projects that involve modernising or digitalising existing
networks.
Every million dollars spent modernising distribution lines would support up to six jobs for a
one-year construction phase, and around two jobs in manufacturing. Investment in smart
grids would create additional employment for a range of skills and support the
development of new skills (Figure 2.4).

Jobs created

Figure 2.4 ⊳

Average jobs created globally per million dollars of spending on
electricity networks
New infrastructure

Modernise existing

Construction Manufacturing

Construction Manufacturing

6
5
4
3
2
1

Transmission

Distribution

Grid investment supports local jobs to construct, operate and maintain networks,
together with jobs in manufacturing and supply chains.

IEA. All rights reserved

Implications for emissions and resilience
Losses from the transmission and distribution of electricity through inefficient networks
mean that additional electricity must be generated to service the same level of demand.
Losses in grids resulted in around 1 gigatonne of carbon dioxide (Gt CO2) emissions in 2018.
We estimate that reducing worldwide losses towards efficient levels of around 5% from as
much as 18% in some regions today could reduce these emissions by over 400 Mt CO2.
Options to reduce these losses include replacing transformers and power lines, and
optimising the reactive power profile. Investments in smart grids would facilitate further
CO₂ emissions reductions by reducing load peaks, load shifting, facilitating the integration
Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

47

2

of renewables generation, supporting the adoption of electric vehicles and improving
energy efficiency.
The digitalisation of electricity systems improves reliability and reduces operating costs.
Investment in smart, modern, secure and climate-proof networks also helps diversify the
power mix and reduces the risk of power outages and losses in the future. The Covid-19
crisis has highlighted the critical role of electricity and information and communication
technologies (ICT) systems in our society, and investment could help accelerate the building
of energy efficient ICT infrastructure. Modern electricity systems are also exposed to other
risks from natural, technological and man-made threats. Investment is needed to safeguard
electricity systems and to increase resilience in the face of these threats. In many
developing economies, investment in electricity networks and mini-grids is particularly
needed to increase the reliability of the network, support the connection of renewable
energy and displace polluting diesel generation.

2.2.2

Accelerate the growth of wind and solar PV

Wind and solar PV power technologies have rapidly become the most favoured power
generation technologies in markets around the world. In 2019, capital spending in wind and
solar PV made up almost half of total power plant investment. Wind and solar PV
accounted for 80% of the growth in global electricity supply in 2019 and now make up the
majority of global power capacity additions, up from under 20% in 2010 (Figure 2.5). The
rapid growth of solar PV and wind has been paired with impressive cost reductions: close to
80% on average for solar PV, 40% for onshore wind and 30% for offshore wind power over
the past ten years (IRENA, 2020).

GW

Figure 2.5 ⊳

Global solar PV and wind power capacity additions, 2010-2020

240

60%

200

50%

160

40%

120

30%

80

20%

40

10%

2010

2015

IEA. All rights reserved

Solar PV

Wind

2020e

Share of capacity additions (right axis)

Solar PV and wind have rapidly become the most commonly built type of
new generation, accounting for roughly half of all new capacity in 2018 and 2019.
Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.

48

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Solar PV and wind power have so far shown a degree of immunity to the Covid-19 crisis,
with renewables-based generation increasing by 3% in the first-quarter 2020. New
construction has slowed, however, and global wind and solar PV additions are set to fall by
16% in 2020. Supply chains have been disrupted by measures to contain and slow the
spread of Covid-19 and there have been delays due to reduced personnel availability at all
stages of the supply chain, from equipment production to transporting materials, and from
siting and licensing to construction work. Re-establishing these supply chains, which often
involve companies in different regions of the world, requires careful cross-border
collaboration.

Selected policy approaches
Solar PV and wind deployment are increasingly competitive, but their deployment remains
closely tied to supportive policy frameworks for renewable energy in close to
180 countries. Direct financial support for solar PV and wind is now less common than in
the past, though it is still used to accelerate investment. In the United States, investment
and production tax credits continue to support solar PV and wind expansion.
Incorporating market signals and reflecting the impact on system costs will be increasingly
important for support measures as wind and solar PV come to represent increasing shares
of electricity supply. For small-scale solar PV, incentivising self-consumption and
appropriately reflecting the value to the system are top policy priorities, as new
opportunities arise from more digitalised power systems. In the wake of the Covid-19 crisis,
policy tools that aim to reduce tax burdens may need to shift towards grants to increase
the efficacy of support, as was done following the 2008 financial crisis. Auction schemes are
also gaining in popularity for utility-scale projects and now support more than half of all
renewables deployment in the near term. These schemes help to harness competitive
forces so as to drive down technology prices, control financial commitments and reduce
financing costs by minimising price risks. Policy makers are also paying increasing attention
to the importance of diversifying supply chains for critical minerals needed for solar PV and
wind (IEA, 2020c).

IEA. All rights reserved

Economic implications
There are about 5 million jobs are associated with the solar and wind industries (IRENA,
2019). We estimate that these account for nearly one-third of global power sector
employment. A wide range of skills are needed across value chains. About half of the solar
workforce is local, and works on project development, installation and O&M activities for
large- or small-scale projects. There are close to two million solar manufacturing jobs
worldwide: China has around 70% of global PV component manufacturing capacity, and
Southeast Asia has around 10%. In the wind industry, most manufacturing takes place in
the United States, Europe, China and India.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

49

2

Annual electricity generation per million dollars of capital

Figure 2.6 ⊳

investment in solar PV and wind power, 2010 and 2020

2020e

Wind offshore

2010
Wind onshore

Solar PV utility

Solar PV buildings
500

1 000

1 500

2 000

2 500
MWh

Falling costs for solar PV and wind over the past decade have
significantly increased the productivity per unit of investment.
Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020; MWh = megawatt-hours.
Source: IEA analysis based on IRENA (2020).

Falling costs for new solar PV and wind projects over the past decade have made capital
investment far more productive. The expected annual generation from investment in solar
PV in 2020 is more than seven-times the amount for the same investment in 2010: for
onshore wind it has nearly doubled and for offshore wind it has risen by over 60%
(Figure 2.6).
Solar is the most labour-intensive power generation technology. For utility-scale solar PV,
1 million dollars of capital spending now creates about 3 local construction jobs and about
6 manufacturing jobs. Rooftop solar PV is more labour intensive and creates around
10 construction jobs for the same investment.

IEA. All rights reserved

Wind power is less labour intensive. Onshore wind power projects create about one job in
construction and one-half in manufacturing per million dollars invested. Offshore wind
creates about one-fifth as many construction jobs but twice the number of manufacturing
jobs per unit of investment.
There are over 600 000 O&M jobs worldwide today in solar PV and wind. Utility-scale
solar PV creates between 0.3-0.4 O&M jobs per million dollars invested, on a par with
thermal power plants; rooftop solar PV creates three-times as many O&M jobs per unit of
investment. The number of O&M jobs created per million dollars invested in wind is much
smaller.

50

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Solar PV and wind power offer opportunities to deploy capital rapidly at both new and
existing sites. New projects can be constructed quickly once permits are in place. The
streamlining of administrative processes would help to speed up projects further. For
projects that have chosen sites and obtained the necessary licences, the construction phase
can often be completed in less than a year. Rooftop solar PV installation draws on widely
available skills and can also be scaled up quickly.
Projects to repower existing sites can generally deploy capital even more quickly because
they do not have to manage pre-development or site preparation and there are fewer
permitting processes. There are significant opportunities to repower ageing wind farms by
upgrading turbines and other components: over the past three years, about $13 billion was
invested to repower wind parks in the United States and Europe, and there is potential for
nearly twice that amount to be invested in the next three years (IEA, 2020d). Opportunities
are more limited for repowering solar PV as the vast majority of existing capacity has been
built within the past decade. Repowering wind and solar projects are as cost effective as
new projects in reducing power sector emissions.

Implications for emissions and resilience
Solar PV and wind power are in the vanguard of clean energy transitions. They are widely
available at commercial scale and are a cost-effective means of reducing CO2 emissions,
while at the same time lowering local air pollution and reducing energy-related water use.
The extent of CO2 emission reductions depends on the type of power plant that is
displaced. Many developing economies are currently heavily reliant on coal-fired
generation: around 65-75% of electricity generation in China and India, and about 40% in
Southeast Asia comes from coal. When displacing coal-fired generation, a 1 GW solar PV
project reduces emissions by close to 1.5 million tonnes of carbon dioxide (Mt CO2)
annually. With higher average capacity factors, 1 GW of wind power avoids about 3 Mt CO2
emissions per year for onshore projects and over 3.5 Mt CO2 for offshore sites. Natural gas
is the largest source of electricity in most advanced economies: where gas is displaced
rather than coal, the associated CO2 emissions reductions from new solar PV and wind
projects would be cut by more than half.

IEA. All rights reserved

Accelerating the construction of utility-scale wind and solar PV requires investments in grid
infrastructure to connect projects and to support integration of their variable output. The
availability of dispatchable sources of electricity is also critical to integrating variable
renewables. New wind and solar PV projects would ideally be located close to demand
centres to minimise integration issues. A surge in rooftop solar PV may require some
reinforcing of distribution grids to maintain reliability to all consumers.
Current supply chain issues are raising concerns about reliance on relatively few equipment
providers, particularly solar panels. For manufacturers, the availability of critical minerals
and sustainability of extraction is also of some concern: these minerals include rare earth
elements such as neodymium, which is used in large onshore and offshore wind turbines.
Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

51

2

2.2.3

Maintain the role of hydro and nuclear power

Hydropower is the largest low-carbon source of electricity worldwide today and nuclear
power is the second-largest source. Together, they represent almost 30% of global
electricity supply and provide 70% of low-carbon electricity generation (Figure 2.7). In
2019, capital spending on new and existing projects was over $50 billion globally for
hydropower and nearly $40 billion for nuclear power. In advanced economies, nuclear
power is the largest low-carbon source of electricity by a wide margin, but its future role is
uncertain as ageing plants begin to shut down. Without additional lifetime extensions,
nearly 40% of the nuclear reactor fleet in advanced economies will retire by 2030. Many
hydropower facilities in advanced economies are also several decades old.

TWh

Figure 2.7 ⊳

Global low-carbon generation by source, 2010-2020

12 000

Other renewables
Solar PV
Wind
Bioenergy
Nuclear
Hydro

10 000
8 000
6 000
4 000
2 000
2010

2015

2020e

Hydro and nuclear power represent the low-carbon foundation of electricity supply today.
Note: TWh = terawatt-hours; 2020e = estimated values for 2020.

IEA. All rights reserved

Hydro and nuclear power have proven relatively resistant to the Covid-19 crisis to date, but
challenging conditions have worsened in key markets where they are exposed to wholesale
price or volume risk. The resulting reduction in revenues and the uncertain pace of
recovery puts at risk capital flows for both hydro and nuclear power, which are more often
exposed to market prices and volumes than other low-carbon sources. Under these
conditions, the hurdle for investment in either existing or new projects is very high. In
terms of CO2 emissions, a lack of new investment in hydro and nuclear power risks
undermining the emissions reductions that derives from growth in other low-carbon
sources of electricity.

Selected policy approaches
Hydro and nuclear power development require sustained support from governments. Both
technologies are capital intensive, and projects can be among the largest in the energy
52

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

sector in terms of total investment. For example, first-of-a-kind nuclear reactors, megahydropower projects and large refurbishment programmes can each require more than
$10 billion in capital spending. Nuclear lifetime extensions of 20 years cost between
$0.5-1.1 billion per GW.
With long development times and high capital requirements, finding ways to limit risks and
facilitate low-cost financing is clearly very important. Direct financial support is not always
necessary: long-term power purchase agreements or feed-in tariffs can offer a degree of
price certainty and have been used extensively in China. Loan guarantees and preferential
loans, where available, can also lower the cost of financing. Five states in the United States,
for example, have provided zero-emission credits to recognise the low-carbon
contributions of nuclear power and keep several reactors in operation in the face of
challenging market conditions. Market-based solutions, such as carbon pricing or capacity
payments, could significantly improve the financial position of both nuclear and
hydropower. Enhanced flexibility markets could also bolster the economics of hydropower.

Economic implications
Hydropower employs about 2 million people globally, over two-thirds of them in local jobs
concerned with operating and maintaining existing facilities. Nuclear power provides over
800 000 jobs, about half of which are located at reactors. New construction of nuclear
power projects has been most prominent in recent years in emerging markets, including
India and China, although several advanced economies continue to support nuclear power.
The development of new hydropower projects is most active in China, Latin America and
Africa.
Existing hydropower projects can be upgraded by replacing turbines to increase maximum
output or adding new pumping facilities to support more flexible operations. Upgrades and
construction work at hydropower projects create about 3 jobs per million dollars of capital
spending. Nuclear lifetime extensions create about 2-3 jobs per million dollars of capital
spending, as well as preserving local O&M jobs.
Accelerating the deployment of new hydro or large-scale nuclear projects can be
challenging: siting can be a lengthy process, and project development may take several
years even under the best conditions before construction can begin. Nonetheless, there are
a handful of shovel-ready nuclear power projects around the world, including in Europe,
which would benefit from greater capital availability. Interest in small modular nuclear
reactors (SMRs) is growing among policy makers and investors, in part due to the
difficulties associated with financing large projects (see section 2.7.3).

IEA. All rights reserved

Implications for emissions and resilience
Hydro and nuclear power are making a significant contribution to emissions reductions.
Without further nuclear lifetime extensions in advanced economies, for example, clean
energy transitions would require around $80 billion additional investment per year and
consumer electricity bills would be around 5% higher (IEA, 2019b).
Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

53

2

In many countries, growth in hydro and nuclear along with expansion of solar PV and wind
power would reduce the need for coal-fired power. If additional output displaces coal-fired
generation, then 1 GW of nuclear power avoids about 6 million tonnes (Mt) of direct CO2
emissions per year. 4 Hydro tends to have a lower utilisation rate than nuclear (because of
seasonal variations), but 1 GW of hydro capacity nevertheless avoids about 3 Mt CO2
emissions. In advanced economies, higher output from hydro or nuclear mainly affects the
amount of gas-fired generation and savings from avoided emissions therefore are lower
(Figure 2.8).

Mt CO₂

Figure 2.8 ⊳

Annual direct CO2 emissions avoided per 1 GW of installed
capacity by technology and displaced fuel

6

Nuclear
Hydro

5

Wind offshore
4

Wind onshore
Solar PV utility

3

Efficient gas

2
1

Coal displaced

Gas displaced

Nuclear power avoids more CO2 emissions per GW of capacity than other fuels.
Notes: Mt CO2 = million tonnes of carbon dioxide. Efficient gas refers to combined-cycle gas turbines. Applied
capacity factors are current global fleet averages for nuclear power, hydro and efficient gas, and global
averages for new projects completed in 2019 for wind offshore, wind onshore and solar PV.

IEA. All rights reserved

Hydro and nuclear power are fundamental to electricity security in many regions since they
have high availability and are dispatchable, low-carbon sources of electricity. Hydropower
is an important source of power system flexibility in many regions and has played a central
role in accommodating sharp reductions in electricity demand in several countries during
lockdowns related to the Covid-19 crisis. Nuclear power tends to operate at constant levels
of output, but can also provide flexibility. In France, for example, nuclear power provides
around three-quarters of electricity supply today, and a significant portion of the nuclear
fleet regularly operates in a load-following mode.

4 Indirect emissions during construction, operations or decommissioning are not included.

54

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Hydro and nuclear power increase fuel diversity and self-sufficiency. Nuclear fuel is only
available from a small number of suppliers, but refuelling is required only once every
18 months to two years. At the same time, appropriate safeguards are critically important
in the nuclear fuel cycle, from mining to enrichment, fabrication and waste disposal.
When managed well, hydropower can also provide critical water-related services that
support irrigation, flood prevention and drought control. However, water withdrawals and
consumption can be a concern for both technologies. Hydropower is subject to seasonal
variations determined by water availability, and there are risks that climate change could
permanently reduce water availability in some regions, although other regions may see an
increase. Nuclear power is one of the most water-intensive power technologies and is often
located on coastlines to ensure a critical supply of water for cooling reactors.
Both hydro and nuclear power are less dependent on critical minerals in their designs and
operations than other low-carbon technologies.

2.2.4

Manage gas- and coal-fired power generation

In 2019, coal was the largest source of electricity at 36%, followed by natural gas at 23%,
although both gas- and coal-fired generation are set to fall in 2020 (Figure 2.9). Coal-fired
power plants are the largest single source of energy-related CO2 emissions globally, at
about 10 Gt per year; even without new additions they could remain so for decades to
come without concerted action including the deployment of carbon capture, utilisation and
storage technologies (IEA, 2019c). Gas-fired generation, which has grown more any other
source over the last decade, emitted about 3 Gt CO2 in 2018 and 2019.

Thousand TWh

Figure 2.9 ⊳

Coal- and gas-fired electricity generation by region, 2010-2020
Coal

Gas

12

8

4

IEA. All rights reserved

2010
United States

2015
European Union

2020e 2010
Other advanced economies

2015
China India

2020e
Rest of world

Coal-fired power generation has been on a plateau globally in recent years,
while gas-fired generation has been rising in most regions.
Note: TWh = terawatt-hours; 2020e = estimated values for 2020.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

55

2

The Covid-19 crisis is having significant impacts on coal and, to a lesser extent, gas. Natural
gas prices, already in decline, recently touched historic lows in several regions, dropping to
around $2 per million British thermal units (MBtu) in the United States, Europe and some
markets in Asia. Global gas-fired generation is on track to be about 7% lower in 2020 than
in 2019 owing to reduced electricity demand and growth in renewables (IEA, 2020a). Coal
has been squeezed by cheaper renewables and cost competition with gas, and is set to
decline by more than 10% in 2020.
Coal-fired power faces financial strains from lower output in regulated markets and
depressed wholesale electricity prices in liberalised markets. New construction of coal
plants may have been delayed due to temporary workforce or supply chain issues, but
nearly 130 GW of coal-fired power capacity is still under construction worldwide. This
project pipeline risks increasing the locked-in emissions from coal-fired power plants that
already threaten to put a sustainable energy pathway out of reach.

Selected policy approaches
Governments can guide power sector investment in several ways, including by providing
long-term vision in line with their countries’ environmental and policy goals to ensure the
consistency of decisions for new construction and existing power plants. Power sector
revenues are set to fall by about 7% worldwide in 2020, though coal-fired power is likely to
be hit harder. Robust carbon pricing or emission trading schemes can be effective tools to
shift decisions concerning existing and new investment onto a more sustainable track.
Many developing economies have fully regulated markets, in which granting gas-fired
generation priority to the grid ahead of coal would help take advantage of low gas prices.
Key principles related to gas- and coal-fired power might include:


Incentivise flexibility and reflect the contributions of all power plants to system
adequacy.



Harness market forces by pricing negative externalities to deliver cost-effective
mitigation of CO2 emissions.



Boost RD&D and deployment of technologies that can reduce pollution and emissions
from coal and gas (see section 2.7.4).

IEA. All rights reserved

Economic implications
Coal-fired power plants support around 1.7 million jobs worldwide, and gas-fired power
plants support around 900 000 jobs (these figures exclude coal mining and natural gas
production). Almost half of these jobs are located on-site and are concerned with the O&M
of existing facilities. For example, a 400 megawatt (MW) coal-fired power plant requires
around 200 people to operate and maintain the facility: a gas-fired power plant of the same
capacity requires about 100 people. Current construction activities employ about
900 000 people worldwide, and manufacturing parts for coal and gas-fired plants employs
about 400 000 people.

56

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Around 1.5 jobs in manufacturing and 4 jobs in construction would be created per million
dollars of capital investment, together with 0.4 O&M jobs in the longer term. Gas-fired
power plants are less complex to build, operate and maintain, but also have lower capital
costs: they create about 4.5 jobs per million dollars of capital investment during the
construction phase and about 0.3 O&M jobs.
At the start of 2020, over 500 GW of coal-fired capacity was in the planning phase,
including 180 GW in China, 100 GW in India and 95 GW in Southeast Asia. However the
long-term operating environment is likely to be challenging, given falling costs of
renewables and the environmental implications of coal-fired power. The case for building
this planned new coal capacity – without CCUS – needs to be carefully weighed against the
implications for local air pollution and global climate goals.

Implications for emissions and resilience
As leading sources of electricity generation and the largest emitters of CO2 in the power
sector today, the role of coal and gas is central to discussions on clean energy transitions.
Coal-to-gas switching within the existing fleet of power plants as a transition measure can
deliver immediate reductions of CO2 emissions and local air pollution. 5 Combined-cycle gas
turbines are typically more efficient than those burning coal, enabling them to emit about
50% less CO2 per unit of electricity generated than an average coal-fired power plant
(without CCUS).
Based on current commodity prices – and only using existing gas-fired power plants and gas
delivery infrastructure – we estimate that cost-effective coal-to-gas switching in the power
sector could reduce global emissions by around 340 Mt CO2 (Figure 2.10). The majority of
the cost-effective potential lies in the United States and Europe: coal-to-gas switching could
displace about half of the coal-fired power output in both. Elsewhere, the switching
potential may not be economic at local gas prices, particularly in Asia where long-term
contracts with prices pegged to a historical average of oil tend to have higher prices than
seen in spot markets.

IEA. All rights reserved

Where new capacity is under consideration, gas-fired power plants require two to three
years to construct, and when in operation can reduce emissions by around 2 Mt CO2 per
GW each year if displacing coal-fired generation. New high efficiency coal-fired power
plants can reduce CO2 emissions if they displace less efficient coal plants. However, without
adding CCUS so as to reduce CO2 emissions by nearly 100%, or co-firing with biomethane or
biomass, the additional emissions would put long-term climate change goals at risk.
Action to reduce emissions from unabated coal-fired generation as rapidly as possible is a
critical element of a sustainable energy pathway, but this – and action in due course to
minimise unabated natural gas-fired generation - has to be achieved while maintaining
affordability and electricity security. Coal- and gas-fired power plants currently provide a
5 Reducing methane emissions from oil and gas operations are discussed in section 2.6.1.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

57

2

number of benefits in terms of security of supply, dispatchability and power system
flexibility. They are currently the largest sources of power system flexibility globally, and
(together with grid flexibility, energy storage and demand-side response measures) play a
critical role in the integration of variable renewables. They also provide ancillary services
that ensure power quality.
Figure 2.10 ⊳ CO2 emissions savings possible from coal-to-gas switching at
6

Mt CO₂

Dollars per MBtu

different gas prices (left) and cost-effective savings in 2020 (right)

5

180
150

4

120

3

90

2

60

1

30
0

200

400

European Union

600

800

1 000
Mt CO₂

United States

Rest of world

It is technically feasible to avoid about 1 000 Mt of CO2 from coal-to-gas switching using
existing infrastructure. One-third of it is cost effective under current regional fuel prices.
Notes: MBtu = million British thermal units; Mt CO2 = million tonnes of carbon dioxide.

2.3

Transport

IEA. All rights reserved

Due to Covid-19 lockdowns, global private car use in April 2020 was around 40% lower than
in previous months (IEA, 2020e). Car sales have also been affected, with a 30% year-onyear drop in sales in first-quarter 2020. We estimate that around 2 million jobs in the
automotive industry are at risk globally, representing around 15% of the manufacturing
workforce in this sector. The aviation, high-speed rail and public transport sectors also have
been hit hard by Covid-19, with air travel demand 6 expected to be around 50% lower in
2020 than in 2019 (Peace, 2020). Many governments are now looking to support the
transport sector to preserve employment and ensure the continuity of transport services,
while also improving resilience and sustainability.
We focus in this section on three specific areas: encouraging consumer purchase of more
efficient new vehicles, urban infrastructure and high-speed rail (Figure 2.11).
6 Air travel demand is expressed in revenue passenger kilometres (RPK).

58

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Figure 2.11 ⊳ Employment multipliers for investment in the transport sector
Jobs per million dollars

25

20

2

15

10

5

Pedestrian and
bike lanes

Charging
infrastructure

Railway

Battery cell
manufacturing

ICE car
manufacturing

Battery electric
car manufact.

Charging points and bike infrastructure have large employment multipliers. Manufacturing
BEVs is less labour intensive than ICEs, but battery production could offset this drop.
Notes: ICE = internal combustion engine; BEV = battery electric vehicle. Ranges show differences across
regions.

New vehicles: The automotive sector directly employs around 11 million workers globally
and supports a further 4 million indirect jobs (for parts manufacturing). 7 Car sales are
expected to fall globally by around 15% in 2020 and commercial vehicles production by
22% (IHS, 2020a). Consumer incentives for the replacement of old, inefficient vehicles by
new, more energy efficient ones are a way of sustaining production facilities. For
commercial vehicles such as trucks, support could take the form of improved financing or
tax reductions for low-emission vehicles. In addition to job retention, these incentive
schemes can enhance energy security through reduced oil consumption, and, if designed
appropriately, can reduce air pollution and GHG emissions. Boosting demand for electric
vehicles, including fuel cell vehicles, would incentivise automakers to shift towards lower
emission models and to pursue cost reductions in battery and fuel cell manufacturing: it
could also lead to jobs in new domestic industries such as battery production (see
section 2.7).

IEA. All rights reserved

Expand high-speed rail networks: The high-speed rail industry directly employs
420 000 people in operation and management jobs today, and the construction of projects
supports around 2.6 million construction and engineering jobs. Government support to this
sector to ensure the completion of announced projects would help to protect these jobs
and could create an additional 220 000 jobs in O&M. Railways can support territorial
cohesion and spatially balanced and decentralised economic development. Rail travel is
Indirect jobs include suppliers that produce parts exclusively for automobiles and would not see job
creation due to purchases made in other industries.

7

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

59

also the most efficient transport mode for journeys under 800 km (IEA, 2019d), requiring
on average 12-times less energy per passenger kilometre than airplanes and road vehicles.
Improve urban infrastructure: W alking and cycling has significantly increased since the
outbreak of Covid-19, and many cities have reallocated road space to pedestrians and
cyclists. However the use of public transport in cities worldwide has fallen by 50-90%, with
billions of dollars of revenue losses for operators (Moovit, 2020). Globally, the public
transport sector employs about 13 million people and plays an important role in ensuring
accessibility for citizens in many cities (UITP, 2011). Without government assistance, there
is a risk that jobs could be lost, operations curtailed and prices raised. Any resulting modal
shift to cars would increase GHG and air pollutant emissions as well as congestion levels.
Investment in public transport systems, including the electrification of city bus systems,
would create around 30% more construction and engineering jobs than a similar level of
investment in roads (Smart Growth America, 2011). Public health fears could be addressed
by investing in heightened cleaning practices on public transport and by appropriate social
distancing measures.

2.3.1

New vehicles

IEA. All rights reserved

Passenger car sales grew by just under 5% every year on average over the past decade
(Figure 2.12). The Covid-19 crisis is bringing this period of sustained growth to an abrupt
halt: we expect global car sales in 2020 to fall by around 15% from 2019 levels. Meanwhile
the commercial vehicles market is expected to decline globally by 22% in 2020 (IHS, 2020a).
In the European Union, demand for new trucks decreased by 35% during the first four
months of 2020 (ACEA, 2020a). The automotive industry globally employs around
14 million workers in vehicle manufacturing. We estimate that around 2 million jobs are
now at risk globally due to the declining demand for new vehicles.
After the 2008-09 global economic crisis, several countries introduced vehicle scrappage
programmes as part of efforts to support domestic automotive industries. For example, the
United States established a cash-for-clunkers scheme in 2009 that is estimated to have led
to additional sales of 440 000 - 600 000 new cars (US GAO, 2010): nearly half of the vehicles
sold were manufactured in the United States, creating or retaining 40 000 - 120 000 local
jobs during the period of the scheme (Romer and Carroll, 2009). By incorporating fuel
efficiency and GHG emissions standards as well as lifecycle impact considerations in
programme design, scrappage programmes can incentivise consumers and companies to
replace their old, less efficient, vehicles with more efficient alternatives such as hybrids,
plug-in hybrids, battery electric and fuel cell vehicles. Where schemes involve the trade-in
of an old car, enabling people to trade their cars for alternative forms of transport, such as
bikes, e-bikes, e-cargo bikes or public transport passes, can help to boost cycling and public
transport, and to reduce emissions. Similar scrappage programmes targeting other vehicle
types such as two/three- wheelers, taxis, buses and light trucks could also contribute to job
retention, fleet modernisation and emissions reductions. For example, China has
announced direct and indirect incentives for reviving the trucks market and has extended
subsidies for electric vehicles until 2022 (IHS, 2020a).
60

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Figure 2.12 ⊳ Passenger car sales by key region
Million vehicles

100

Other
Europe

80

United States
China

60
40
20

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020e
Global passenger car sales in 2020 are expected to drop by 15% compared with 2019.
Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.

Economic implications
The employment implications of vehicle scrappage schemes depend upon the job intensity
and the geographical distribution of a country’s car manufacturing industry. Scrappage
schemes create direct manufacturing jobs by increasing new car sales: they also create jobs
in car disassembly and metal recycling, as well as programme administration.
Table 2.2 ⊳

Direct manufacturing jobs in the automotive sector
in key producer regions
Car production in 2019
(millions)

Jobs in 2019
(millions)

Jobs at risk*
(millions)

China

22.6

4.3

0.6

Europe

21.8

3.8

0.5

United States

15.5

2.2

0.3

Southeast Asia

13.8

1.9

0.3

Latin America

3.9

0.7

0.1

India

3.6

0.7

0.1

Other regions

2.9

0.5

0.1

Africa

1.1

0.2

0.0

Country/region

IEA. All rights reserved

*Estimate based on declines in passenger car sales expected in 2020.

Tying the size of subsidies for new car purchases to fuel efficiency and GHG emission
standards can improve the overall efficiency of the car fleet. More efficient ICEs and
hybrids do not require a significant change in the automotive value chain and associated
Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

61

2

skills. However, electric engines have around 200 components, as opposed to
1 400 components in internal combustion engines (FES, 2015). As a result, electric vehicle
(EV) manufacturing reduces the need for upstream parts manufacturing and assembly
labour: at the same time it creates local jobs downstream in the installation and O&M of
charging points (AIE, 2018).
Excluding job creation connected with charging infrastructure and battery manufacturing,
plug-in hybrid electric cars create an additional 6 000 jobs for every 1 million cars sold
compared to a gasoline car (ICE), whereas battery electric cars create 20 000 fewer jobs
(Wietschel et al., 2017). The difference in manufacturing jobs created between ICEs and
electric cars is however more than offset if batteries are produced domestically. Current
battery production for EVs is geographically concentrated, with China accounting for more
than 70% of global battery capacity (Benchmark Minerals, 2020) (see section 2.7). While
manufacturing costs may substantially differ across regions, a more regionally diffuse
battery value chain could offer more resilience.
Scrappage schemes can be rolled out relatively quickly, helping retain jobs in the short term
and clearing vehicle stocks accumulated during lockdown periods: however, their effect
might only be temporary, serving to bring forward future vehicle sales. While these
schemes can reduce transport GHG emissions by incentivising electrification, they are less
cost effective than carbon pricing. As such, their implementation should be time-limited
and paired with long-term strategies to address the multiple challenges faced by the
automotive sector, which include electrification, workforce re-training and the need to
adjust to a potential structural reduction in demand in certain regions, if teleworking
patterns persist.
Scrappage schemes involving unconditional rebates might lead to most of the subsidies
going to high-income households retaining the budget capacity to buy a new car during an
economic downturn. Tying rebate eligibility to income criteria, as in France’s recently
revised scrappage scheme, could help to prevent this.

IEA. All rights reserved

Implications for emissions and resilience
Over one-third of the global car fleet is more than ten years old. Replacing a ten-year old
gasoline car with a new same class hybrid car would result in a 40% reduction in lifecycle
CO2 emissions in most regions. The lifetime emissions savings of replacing a ten-year old
ICE car with a battery electric vehicle (BEV) depend on the emissions intensity of electricity
generation. Based on today’s electricity mix, emissions from a BEV would be 80% lower
than an ICE vehicle in the European Union, 60% lower in the United States and around 40%
lower in China. Emissions savings are likely to increase in the future as power sectors
decarbonise. Shifting to the most fuel efficient gasoline cars could also reduce nitrogen
oxide (NOX) emissions by 14%, while shifting to BEVs would eliminate NOX emissions almost
entirely (Bieker and Mock, 2020; EEA, 2018).

62

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Fuel efficient and electric cars can be cost-effective purchases for consumers. At an oil price
of $60/barrel, hybrid cars have a payback period of around six years, 8 during which the
higher upfront cost is paid back in the form of lower operating costs relative to an average
gasoline car. This translates to a range of abatement costs from minus $110 per tonne of
carbon dioxide (tCO2) to plus $15/tCO2 (Figure 2.13) depending on fuel taxes, mileage
driven, and other regional circumstances. For electric cars, the payback period is around
eight years. However, battery costs have declined by around 70% over the last five years
and are expected to continue to fall; this will shorten payback period further in the years to
come. If the oil price levels were to be around $30/barrel, this would add two-three years
to the payback period of both hybrids and EVs. Two/three-wheelers have high potential for
electrification, especially in developing Asia, while placing minimal pressure on electricity
grids, delivering substantial benefits in terms of air pollution and noise reduction, and
having lower material requirements for batteries than EVs. The payback period for electric
two/three-wheelers is around three-four years in most countries.
The electrification of bus fleets could contribute significantly to mitigating air pollution in
urban areas. Creating low-emission zones in city centres also has benefits for air pollution
arising from transport.
Figure 2.13 ⊳ Payback period and abatement costs for road vehicles
Payback period

Abatement costs

Electric bus
Electric
two/three
wheeler
BEV
Hybrid car
5

10

15

20
Years

- 300 - 150

$60/barrel

0

150 300 450
Dollars per tCO2

$30/barrel

IEA. All rights reserved

Upfront costs of EVs are higher than ICEs, but paybacks are around eight years on average
today; the competitiveness of electric buses heavily relies on battery size and fuel price.
Note: Assumes a conventional powertrain (gasoline car or motorbike and diesel bus) as the reference
technology for each of the key markets (United States, China, India and European Union). Ranges show
regional differences based on vehicle characteristics (power engine: cars 90-150 kW, motorbikes 6.5 kW,
buses 180-220 kW; battery size: cars 50-70 KWh, motorbikes 2.5-4 kWh, buses 210-300 kWh; annual
mileage: cars 10 000-17 000 km, motorbikes 6 000-8 000 km, buses 23 000-35 000 km) with gasoline prices
of $0.8-1.5 per litre. Abatement costs include tank-to-wheel emissions, including emissions from power
generation for EVs. Real gasoline pump prices recorded during April 2020 were used for the $30/barrel case.
8 The payback period is the time needed for savings in running costs (i.e. fuel and maintenance costs) to
outweigh higher upfront costs compared to a conventional vehicle (i.e. gasoline car).

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

63

2

2.3.2

Expand high-speed rail networks

Long-distance rail transport has been severely affected by recent mobility restrictions:
demand in first-quarter 2020 fell by more than 80% from levels in 2019 (WSDOT, 2020;
Boursier, 2020). Demand for rail travel is expected to remain low even after travel
restrictions are lifted because of reduced customer spending and continuing health
concerns. The aviation industry has also been severely impacted by lockdown measures
and the fallout from Covid-19. Some governments have started to support the aviation
sector by providing financial relief packages to try to limit job losses: a co-ordinated
approach would also consider investment into alternatives modes of transport such as
high-speed rail (HSR).
Before the crisis, major rail companies employed around 3 million people in operation and
management jobs and operated more than 360 000 km of rail network (Railway
Technology, 2018). There are around 60 000 km of HSR in operation today, and around
32 000 km HSR lines are under construction or planned around the world (Figure 2.14).
Many of the projects under construction are heavily reliant on public support and, with the
economic downturn and pressure on public budgets, there is a risk that this could be
reduced. Stabilising these projects would prevent job losses, while accelerating plans for
new HSR lines would spur new employment and could, if well prepared and executed,
provide long-term economic and environmental benefits.
Figure 2.14 ⊳ High-speed rail networks around the world, 2020

In operation

China
Europe

Under
construction

Japan
Middle East
Korea
United States
India
Africa
10

20

30

40

50

Thousand km

IEA. All rights reserved

A global network of 60 000 kilometres of operational high-speed rail employs more than
420 000 people; current projects account for a further 2.6 million construction jobs.

Economic implications
The high-speed rail industry is likely to require some short-term financial aid to limit job
losses from operators and to maintain the development of new projects. In 2019,
60 000 km of operational HSR projects across the world employed over 420 000 people in
64

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

operations and management jobs, while HSR construction projects currently support
around 2.6 million construction jobs globally. The majority of existing HSR lines and those
under construction are in China, Europe and Japan, but a number of regions such as the
Middle East, India, Africa and the United States are currently building their first lines.
Besides protecting the loss of these construction jobs, the completion of all projects that
are currently underway would generate around 220 000 jobs in operations and
management.
Looking beyond the projects under construction, financial support to plan and promote
new projects would also create additional jobs in manufacturing, although these may be
largely limited to countries with existing manufacturing bases such as China and Japan
unless new local supply chains are also developed. Promoting high-speed rail could also
create domestic jobs in the power sector by increasing electricity demand.

Implications for emissions and resilience
Previous IEA reports have shown that around 20% of domestic flights in North America,
10% of flights in Europe and almost 8% of flights in Asia-Pacific could be displaced by highspeed rail (IEA, 2019d). An estimated 18 grammes of CO2-eq would be saved for every
passenger kilometre travelled by high-speed rail rather than by air.
High-speed rail, on average, is at least 12-times more energy efficient than air and road
travel per passenger kilometre. Investment in HSR could therefore strengthen energy
security and resilience of oil importing countries, as well as reduce emissions. We estimate
that, if the share of rail passenger activity were to increase by 60% above current levels, it
would avoid around 200 million tonnes of oil equivalent (Mtoe) in energy demand by 2030.
Most of this would take the form of a reduction in the demand for oil of around 4 million
barrels per day (mb/d). Conversely, a modal shift from railways to road transport could lead
to an increase of up to 8 mb/d in oil consumption (IEA, 2019d).

2.3.3

Improve urban infrastructure

IEA. All rights reserved

The lockdown measures brought about by the Covid-19 pandemic have led to large-scale
reductions in urban transport activity: the number of trips in most cities has reduced by
more than 50% (Citymapper, 2020). Even after lockdown measures are relaxed, use of
urban public transport may remain low due to social distancing needs and passengers’
health concerns. In contrast, cycling and walking, are increasing, as is car travel. Several
cities are looking at improving infrastructure to promote walking and cycling, with the aim
of creating job opportunities while improving air quality and health and wellbeing of
citizens: investment in public transport and in charging infrastructure for electric vehicles
and electric buses offers a complementary way to achieve those objectives.

Charging infrastructure
The provision and availability of recharging infrastructure for EVs and electrified ride
sharing services (e.g. e-bikes, scooters, e-buses) plays a key role in the uptake of electroChapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

65

2

mobility. Globally, there were nearly 1 million public recharging points in 2019, a 60%
increase compared with 2018 (IEA, 2020e). There is a strong correlation between the
availability of charging infrastructure and the size of the EV fleet (Figure 2.15). More
extensive charging infrastructure therefore will be required within cities as the use of EVs
and other forms of electric mobility increases. The installation and manufacturing of
electric charging points supports over 12 jobs per million dollars of investment.

Electric car fleet

8

Thousand chargers

Million cars

Figure 2.15 ⊳ Global electric cars and public charging points in key markets

6
4

Public chargers

500
400
300
200

2

2014

600

100
2015
China

2016

2017

2018
Europe

2019

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
United States

Other

There is a strong correlation between electric car fleet and number of public chargers.

Electric buses offer an efficient and flexible form of public transport. Around 95% of global
electric buses today operate in China (IEA, 2020f). China recently announced the extension
of subsidy schemes for supporting electric buses to 2022 and plans to construct additional
charging stations to support public transport electriﬁcation (MIIT, 2020). In the European
Union, around 1 600 new electric buses were sold in 2019, implying a market share of only
4% (ACEA, 2020b). The average payback period of an electric bus is 9-11 years (based on an
oil price of $30-60/barrel) and abatement costs range from $10-250/tCO2. 9 Battery costs
are expected to continue to fall, shortening the average payback period. Additional
investments in electro-mobility infrastructure would further accelerate the electrification
of the bus fleet.

IEA. All rights reserved

A rapid adoption of electric trucks and vans would cut CO2 emissions and local air pollution.
A growing number of countries and regions are introducing policies for electric trucks,
including India, European Union, China and Latin America. More than 6 000 battery electric
trucks were sold in China in 2019 and around 750 new electric trucks were registered in

9 Compared with a diesel bus, including tank-to-wheel emissions and indirect emissions from the power
sector.

66

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Europe in 2019. Many major postal and package delivery companies have also pledged to
expand their electric fleets: Amazon has pledged to have 100 000 electric delivery vans on
the road by 2024, and DHL has committed to operating 70% of first- and last-mile delivery
services with clean transport modes by 2025 (IEA, 2020f).

2

Public transport investment
Public transport allows efficient and affordable travel for all, and has been especially
important during the Covid-19 crisis for transporting essential workers. Public transport
systems, which employ 13 million globally, are under substantial duress because of
Covid-19 (UITP, 2011). In Europe alone, a drop in revenue of around 40 billion dollars is
expected in 2020 (IRJ, 2020).
Public transport has an important role to play in ensuring equal access to employment and
education, and is an energy efficient means of transport. It provides important job creation
opportunities: constructing new public transport lines can produce around 30% more jobs
per dollar than investment in roads. Spending on transport projects in the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 is estimated to have produced around 2.5 jobs per
million dollars of investment (Smart Growth America, 2011).
Globally, over 8 000 km of metro and light rail have been commissioned and/or are under
construction, and around the same amount is at an early planning stage. The estimated
investment needed for these schemes at the early planning stage is over $350 billion, of
which 60% is in low- and medium-income economies (UIC, 2017). This would create around
5 million jobs. Road space reallocation efforts could also bring “Bus-Rapid Transit” systems
into cities that do not have them, which are less capital intensive than metros and have
shorter construction periods (Loo, 2018).

Walking and cycling infrastructure

IEA. All rights reserved

In regions that have eased their lockdowns, use of public transport has remained 50%
lower than normal, while walking and biking levels have increased. Cities in the United
States, including Chicago and Philadelphia, saw use of their bicycle share programmes
nearly double during March 2020, while a number of European countries have seen an
increase in bicycle count trends (Figure 2.16).
To maintain social distancing and avoid the negative impacts of increased car use, a
number of cities – including Milan, Paris, Bogota and San Francisco – have reallocated road
space to allow for increased walking and cycling. Making road space reallocation
permanent by building bike lanes and expanded walkways could create over half a million
local jobs globally in construction in the immediate to near term. The level of investment
required is on the order of $40 billion. Additional jobs would be created through bicycle
sales, repair and tourism, and could result in around 10 million new jobs across the
manufacturing and retail sectors.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

67

Figure 2.16 ⊳ Increase in weekday bicycle activity in selected countries
compared with pre-lockdown periods

Finland
Italy
United Kingdom
Austria
Germany
France
20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

120%

A number of European countries have shown a large increase in recent bicycle activity.
Note: Compares activity in the week before lockdown measures were imposed and the third week of May
2020.
Source: Eco-Counter (2020).

Cities are also facilitating cycle use through incentives to repair existing bicycles and to
purchase new ones. This has increased levels of local shopping: for example, establishing
cycle paths in Manhattan, New York, was shown to increase local trade by up to 50% (Raje
and Saffrey, 2016).
Payback periods for consumer purchase are typically less than six months for bicycles and
up to two years for e-bikes. Abatement costs for investment in walking and cycling
infrastructure are typically negative: estimates vary depending on emission factors of the
modes they replace, the extent to which modal shift is from car or public transport, and the
potential for induced travel. We estimate the abatement cost to be minus $100-50/tCO2.
Active travel also provides a range of health and societal benefits. One study indicated that
for each dollar invested, the social benefits are over five-times higher (UK Department of
Transport, 2014). Replacing the use of private vehicles with walking, cycling or public
transport use brings air quality and noise reduction benefits and reduces congestion: this is
particularly beneficial in cities with high pollution levels.

IEA. All rights reserved

2.4

Buildings

Close to 10% of the global workforce today is involved in construction, manufacturing
related to buildings and other related activities. The Covid-19 pandemic is resulting in
drastic declines in construction and investment in the buildings sector because of
disruptions to on-site working conditions, labour availability and material supply chains.
More than 25 million jobs across the sector have been lost or are at risk in 2020.
68

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Investment in energy efficiency in buildings is expected to fall by nearly 15% in 2020 from
around $150 billion in 2019. With buildings accounting for more than 30% of global energy
use today and 30% of energy-related CO2 emissions, investment needs to accelerate
significantly if the world is to meet its sustainable development goals. Lack of access to
clean cooking is a major inequality issue for the 2.6 billion people who currently lack access
to it, and the decline in investment in 2020 is likely to slow progress towards achieving this
sustainable development goal.
In this section we explore options that could stimulate job creation and provide a boost to
the economy while also improving sustainability and resilience. Measures to promote
energy efficiency, renewables and clean cooking access within the buildings sector could
mitigate the impacts of the crisis, provide jobs and kick-start economic recovery, as well as
bringing long-term benefits well beyond the buildings sector as savings from lower energy
bill are reinvested, and as energy system resilience and sustainability is improved.
Retrofit existing buildings and more efficient new constructions: We estimate that
9-30 jobs would be created for every million dollars invested in energy efficiency measures
in the buildings sector. Measures in this area often have short lead-times: existing
efficiency programmes, for example, can be rapidly expanded and new projects can be
shovel-ready within weeks or months. Targeting support to social housing and government
buildings in the first instance could help kick-start efficiency improvement works, creating a
pipeline of projects for the industry. Government investment in accelerating energy
efficiency in buildings would bring long-lasting benefits: it would reduce energy bills for
consumers, reduce energy poverty, improve health and comfort, and improve resilience in
the face of climate events and price shocks.

IEA. All rights reserved

More efficient and connected household appliances: Lower household incomes, disruption
to global supply chains and the closure of retail outlets have resulted in the deferral or
cancellation of many appliance purchases. This has slowed the rate of improvement in
energy efficiency. Action to support the replacement of old appliances with new, highly
efficient and connected appliances would create 7-16 jobs for every million dollars spent.
Sales could be accelerated quickly, providing relief to the entire appliance supply chain,
while increased use of smart connected appliances could reduce consumer bills and
electricity system operation costs. Subsidies would also assist manufacturers in upgrading
production lines to produce more efficient equipment, and support the effective disposal of
old equipment. The safe recycling of old stock is particularly important for air conditioners
and refrigerators, which contain powerful greenhouse gases.
Improve access to clean cooking: More than 2.6 billion people rely on the inefficient and
polluting use of biomass, kerosene or coal as a primary cooking fuel. The resulting
household air pollution causes around 2.5 million premature deaths every year, with Africa
and Asia hardest hit. Recent progress to expand access to clean cooking has been slow and
there are risks that the current crisis could further slow or reverse progress. Around 5 00010 000 households would gain clean cooking access for every million dollars of spending.
Beyond immediate health benefits, investing in access would create distribution and retail
Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

69

2

jobs. It would also reduce GHG emissions, with increases in CO2 emissions from the use of
liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) offset by lower methane and nitrous oxide emissions from
traditional uses of biomass. The use of clean cooking fuels would also avoid the average
one-and-a-half hours that are spent every day collecting fuel wood and reduce the average
four hours a day spent cooking, a burden that primarily falls on women.
Figure 2.17 ⊳ Investment impacts on employment, emissions and households
gaining access to clean cooking

Abatement costs

40
30

300
200
100

20

0

10

- 100

Clean cooking

Households per thousand dollars

Dollars per tCO₂

Jobs per million dollars

Employment
50

15
12
9
6
3

- 200
Retrofits

New buildings

Appliances

Clean cooking access

Global average

Increased investment in efficiency in buildings would create jobs, reduce emissions and
improve access to clean cooking. Most CO2 abatement opportunities also save money.
Notes: tCO2 = tonnes of carbon dioxide. The range of emission reduction costs reflects the diversity of
regional contexts and technology costs.

2.4.1

Retrofit existing buildings and more efficient new constructions

IEA. All rights reserved

The Covid-19 pandemic is drastically reducing global construction and retrofit activity in the
buildings sector. Investment in building construction may decline by 20% to 30% in major
advanced economies in 2020, while also falling in China and India (IEA, 2020d). About
250 million people are employed in construction across the world: estimates suggest that
over 10% of jobs have been or will be lost in 2020, and up to 80% of workers have been
furloughed in some countries.
In some countries, existing buildings are expected to account for up to 80% of the stock in
2030; retrofits have an especially important part to play in improving energy efficiency. In
countries where the building stock is expanding rapidly, it is particularly important to
ensure that new buildings are constructed as efficiently as possible. Delays to construction
and renovation activity will slow energy efficiency improvements, affecting energy use and
related CO2 emissions in the buildings sector. This is especially the case for space heating
and cooling, which account for almost 40% of energy use in buildings today and for 42% of
CO2 emissions and over 60% of direct CO2 emissions in the sector.
70

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Retrofits for existing buildings and efficient new constructions are the primary means of
reducing energy demand in the sector. Where retrofits are needed, they are most effective
at reducing demand and emissions when improvements are made to the building envelope,
for example, adding insulation and improving glazing, and when there is a shift to more
efficient equipment, such as heat pumps or heat solutions based on renewable resources,
and to digital energy management. Building efficiency measures are central to achieving
near zero energy building status in both new and existing buildings.
Average annual energy retrofit rates in buildings are currently less than 1% in most major
markets, which is well below the level required to achieve sustainability objectives. Most
buildings in advanced economies – where heating demand is concentrated –were built
before there were effective building codes. Even today, less than one-third of countries
globally have mandatory energy-related codes for new construction.

Selected policy approaches
Policy approaches to address the current Covid-19 crisis related circumstances include:


Increase incentives for building efficiency improvements, smart energy management
solutions and on-site renewables, including by reducing administrative and processing
times for approvals and addressing shortages of skilled providers.



Target efficiency improvement measures on those households and businesses most
impacted by the crisis, such as low-income households, small businesses and hotels.



Use public procurement to catalyse activity, for example by commissioning efficiency
retrofits of public assets such as social housing, schools, offices and healthcare
facilities.



Provide guarantees to encourage energy service companies to invest in retrofits.



Accelerate or expand existing and planned efficiency programmes.

Economic implications

IEA. All rights reserved

Around 9-30 jobs in manufacturing and construction would be created for every million
dollars invested in retrofits or efficiency measures in new builds. Construction jobs would
mostly be local, while manufacturing jobs in the wider industrial sector would be created
by increased demand for building materials and equipment such as insulation, efficient
glazing and heat pumps (Figure 2.18).
Improving the efficiency of buildings lowers energy bills for consumers, who can spend the
savings on other goods and services, providing a further boost to the economy. Smart
energy management systems can help customers further reduce bills and benefit from
providing demand shifting services to electricity networks. The economic benefits of
retrofits are likely to be highest when projects are focused on the least efficient buildings
and include both building envelope improvements and heating equipment installation.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

71

2

Figure 2.18 ⊳ Job creation and household bill reduction potential to 2025 of
investment in efficiency improvements in buildings

Household heating bills

Employment intensity

Jobs per million dollars

40
30

-5%

20

-10%

10

-15%

Retrofits

New buildings

Advanced economies
Rest of world

-20%

European Union
Japan

Canada
Russia

United States
China

Retrofits in existing buildings and efficiency measures in new construction
can create jobs and reduce consumer bills for space heating by as much as 15%.

Figure 2.19 ⊳ CO2 emissions abatement costs for space heating and annual
Dollars per tCO₂

avoided emissions by measure per million dollars invested

150

Insulation, glazing
and weatherisation

100

Heat pumps

50

Biomass boilers

0

Solar thermal

- 50
- 100
0

2 000
4 000
6 000
8 000
tCO₂ emissions avoided per million dollars invested

IEA. All rights reserved

Many building envelope improvements deliver cost-effective emission reductions:
gains are maximised when coupled with heat pumps or renewable heat solutions.
Notes: tCO2 = tonnes of CO2. Dots represent the global weighted average for various technologies within
each grouping: insulation, glazing and weatherisation = loft and floor insulation, improved glazing,
weatherproofing, cavity wall insulation and exterior insulation; heat pumps = air source and ground source
heat pumps; biomass boilers = conventional boilers and condensing biomass boilers; solar thermal = flat
plate collectors and evacuated tubes.

72

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Implications for emissions and resilience
Deep energy retrofits of old buildings can reduce energy demand linked to space heating by
two-thirds or more: they can also reduce or eliminate emissions where they involve
switching to renewables or decarbonised electricity. Retrofitting 20% of buildings in
advanced economies over the next five years would reduce CO2 emissions from space
heating by around one-fifth. Major cost-effective gains can be achieved by improving
insulation and installing heat pumps (Figure 2.19).
More efficient buildings help to improve the security and resilience of energy systems by
reducing energy use. Retrofits and efficient construction that encourage electrification and
the use of smart energy management systems strengthen the security and resilience of
electricity systems, boosted by the use of smart devices and on-site renewables that
facilitate load management and support increased integration of variable renewables into
electricity networks.

2.4.2

More efficient and connected household appliances

Appliances, such as refrigerators, washing machines, computers and mobile phones,
account for nearly one-quarter of global electricity consumption today. Air conditioners
account for a further 8% of total electricity demand and are one of the fastest sources of
demand growth, having increased by nearly 25% between 2015 and 2019. Much of the
recent growth has come from areas other than advanced economies, in particular from
China and India.
The Covid-19 pandemic is leaving its mark on the appliance industry, with government
restrictions on mobility and work practices significantly impacting appliance manufacturing,
supply chains and consumer sales. Year-on-year sales of white goods in the European Union
fell by 75% in March and April, with a 10-20% drop expected for 2020 as a whole. In the
United States, electronics and appliance store sales fell by 65% in April 2020 relative to
2019 (US Census Bureau, 2020).

IEA. All rights reserved

In contrast, ICT for remote working and home entertainment have seen an increase in sales
during lockdown periods, with implications for electricity use in homes and beyond
(Box 2.2). Continued teleworking could lead to permanent changes in energy demand: it is
estimated that teleworking could increase household energy demand by 7-23%, depending
on the location, season and efficiency of appliances and equipment (IEA, 2020g).
Declines in revenue from the sale of appliances create a risk of job losses across
manufacturing, distribution and sales. There is also a risk of reduced investment in the
upgrading of production facilities to increase appliance efficiency. Lower electricity prices
and lower household incomes could decrease consumer interest in higher efficiency
products. Some governments may seek to weaken or delay mandatory energy performance
standards and labelling for appliances in an effort to stimulate sales. Maintaining – or
strengthening – standards would however increase the economic impact of investments in
the sector, while also creating long-term benefits for consumers and the economy.
Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

73

2

Government actions to support sales of efficient appliances and assist local appliance
manufacturers to improve production facilities and worker skills would yield long-term
benefits by improving the productivity, efficiency and competitiveness of local
manufacturing, increasing appliance efficiency and reducing energy demand and emissions.
The increased use of smart appliances could also improve services and increase economic
gains by rewarding customers for providing services to electricity systems.
Box 2.2 ⊳

Energy footprint of the digital economy

Global internet traffic surged by almost 40% between February and mid-April 2020,
driven by growth in teleworking, video streaming and conferencing, online gaming and
social networking (Sandvine, 2020). The growth during Covid-19 comes on top of a
12-fold growth in global internet traffic since 2010 (Sumits, 2015; Cisco, 2018; ITU,
2020).
Rapid improvements in energy efficiency have helped to limit electricity demand
growth from ICT, which consume around 800 terawatt-hours (TWh) per year, around
3.4% of global electricity use (Malmodin and Lundén , 2018). Global energy use in data
centres has remained flat since 2010 at around 200 TWh, about 1% of global electricity
use, despite a sevenfold growth in workloads (Masanet, 2020).
Demand for data and digital services is expected to continue its exponential growth,
and the Covid 19 crisis may further accelerate these trends. Strong government and
industry efforts on energy efficiency, renewables procurement, and RD&D could limit
growth in ICT energy demand and emissions over the next decade (IEA, 2020h).

Selected policy approaches

IEA. All rights reserved

The choice of policy approaches to stimulate employment and economic activity in the
appliances area depends on the local context. Governments in economies with a significant
appliance manufacturing industry may provide direct support to retain local employment,
while others may intervene to stimulate sales and the economy. Policy options for both
include:


Provide direct rebates or tax reductions to customers to trigger purchases. The largest
subsidies could be offered to low-income households and for the purchase of the most
efficient appliances.



Increase spending on appliances in the public sector, e.g. government buildings,
schools, community centres, to replace low efficiency stock with best available
technologies, including smart appliances where relevant.



Support appliance manufacturers to invest in retooling production lines and train
workers to produce high efficiency appliances.



Support adopting efficiency standards in markets where demand for appliances is
growing.

74

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report



Introduce requirements for appliances to be smart and connected, allowing appliances
to provide demand-side management services to the benefit of consumers and the
grid.



Expand international co-operation on appliance efficiency standards.

2

Economic implications
The majority of jobs related to appliances are in supply chains and sales rather than in
direct manufacturing. Of the nearly 1 million jobs in the white goods appliance sector in
Europe, only around one-quarter are direct manufacturing jobs. China, Mexico, Korea and
Turkey are the largest appliance manufacturing centres globally today.
We estimate that 7-16 jobs would be created for every million dollars of spending, of which
the majority would be in distribution and sales. This job creation effect is strongest when
appliances are manufactured locally.
Figure 2.20 ⊳ Economic opportunities for investment in appliances
Jobs per million dollars

Employment intensity

Subsidy/price ratio to halve payback period

16

40%

12

30%

8

20%

4

10%

High efficiency (A+)
Appliances

Washing machine

Very high efficiency (A+++)

Refrigerator

Air conditioner

IEA. All rights reserved

Incentives covering a small share of sale prices
can cut payback periods in half for consumers.

Replacing old devices with new high efficiency appliances would cut consumer spending on
electricity by around 30-50%. Depending on the type of appliance, and the additional
features sold with more efficient appliances, payback periods range from under one year to
more than ten years. A small subsidy could significantly reduce payback periods for
consumers, accelerating the uptake of efficient appliances and reducing consumer bills
(Figure 2.20). Bill savings are usually invested in more productive and labour-intensive
sectors of the economy.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

75

Implications for emissions and resilience
Energy demand and emissions savings created by appliance-related recovery measures
depend on programme design, and on the level of efficiency specified or triggered.
Replacing one-quarter of the world’s least efficient appliances would, however, be likely to
reduce emissions by over 300 Mt CO2. The average cost of emissions saved depends on the
appliance type and the carbon intensity of electricity in the service region, but CO2
emissions abatement costs are negative for many basic efficiency improvements in washing
machines, refrigerators, televisions and lighting.
Refrigerants in older air conditioners and refrigerators are often hydrofluorocarbons
(HFCs), which can have ozone depleting properties and are potent greenhouse gases. The
Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol calls for the eliminating the production and use
of HFCs; phasing out old refrigerators is central to accomplishing its objectives. Various
support initiatives are underway. For example, the Kigali Cooling Efficiency Program is
funding the upgrading of refrigerator production lines in Argentina, Bangladesh and other
countries to retool manufacturing lines for the production of more efficient appliances
using less damaging refrigerants.
Box 2.3 ⊳

Appliance replacement programme for low-income households
in Mexico

Following the 2008 financial crisis, Mexico had a programme in 2009-18 to replace nonefficient appliances in low-income households. It provided rebates for purchasing new
energy efficient appliances that complied with mandatory efficiency standards. The
primary aim was to reduce household electricity use, which was subsidised in over 95%
of households. It was also an opportunity to reduce GHG emissions and ensure
appropriate disposal of refrigerant gases.
Nearly 2 million refrigerators and air conditioners were replaced, as well as light bulbs,
resulting in estimated savings of almost 700 gigawatt-hours (GWh) annually. All of the
replaced appliances were more than ten years old and in low-income households that
received electricity subsidies. The programme delivered subsidy savings of $22 million
annually through avoided energy consumption. The payback period to the government
was under four years, and the scheme created more than 1 600 new permanent jobs
and 10 500 new temporary jobs. Energy savings avoided 3 400 kilotonnes of carbondioxide equivalent (kt CO2-eq) per year, while the programme captured, stored or
destroyed ozone depleting refrigerant gases, thus avoiding a further 500 kt CO2-eq of
emissions annually.

IEA. All rights reserved

2.4.3

Improve access to clean cooking

Progress on improving access to clean cooking solutions has been slow over the past
decade (Figure 2.21). In 2018, more than 2.6 billion people relied on traditional uses of
biomass, coal or kerosene as a primary cooking fuel. Although improvements have been
76

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

registered in a number of countries, mostly in developing Asia, population growth in subSaharan Africa has outpaced efforts to provide access, and four-out-of- five people do not
have access to clean cooking solutions (IEA, 2019a). On the basis of current policies and
trends, the UN Sustainable Development Goal (7.1.2) to achieve universal access to clean
cooking by 2030 looks to be out of reach.
Figure 2.21 ⊳ Access to clean cooking and premature deaths from household
1.6

1.0

1.2
0.8

Million people

Billion people

air pollution in sub-Saharan Africa and Asia

0.5

0.4

2010 2018
Sub-Saharan Africa
People without access

2010 2018
India

2010 2018
China

People with access

2010 2018
Other Asia
Premature deaths (right axis)

While progress has been achieved in Asia, the number of people
without access to clean cooking solutions continues to rise in sub-Saharan Africa.
Sources: IEA and International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) analyses using World Health
Organization (WHO) Household Energy Database (World Health Organization, 2019) .

IEA. All rights reserved

The Covid-19 crisis and its economic implications risk could significantly slow progress in
expanding access to clean cooking, and in some cases could lead to previous gains being
reversed. Households may switch back to traditional uses of biomass if they cannot afford
cleaner fuels or if there is disruption in supply chains. At the same time, many nascent
companies developing new consumption modes (e.g. LPG pay-as-you-go smart meter
technology), or projects in low-access areas (e.g. bioethanol, upgraded biomass fuels),
could be forced to cease operations as a result of a drop in revenue. There is an urgent
need to develop comprehensive programmes to support such innovative clean cooking
providers and seize opportunities to expand access to clean cooking (IEA, IRENA, UNSD,
World Bank, WHO, 2020).
Recent oil market disruption has resulted in international LPG prices reaching historic lows:
in April and May 2020, they were down by around 40% compared to the 2019 average. This
could make LPG much more affordable for households, provided that low prices are
sustained, and that logistical or regulatory factors do not prevent lower prices being passed
on to consumers. Nonetheless, potential LPG price volatility could be damaging for lowincome customers, and price caps or targeted subsidies may be needed to support longterm use and avoid fuel stacking practices. With lower LPG prices, payback periods for LPG
Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

77

2

stoves could drop from around 3.5 years to 1 year for urban households reliant on paid fuel
wood in sub-Saharan Africa. In many countries with a well-developed LPG sector, such as
Brazil, Indonesia, India, Kenya, Morocco and South Africa, governments have moved quickly
to ensure continuity of supply during the crisis, and have recognised LPG provision as an
essential service. In India, the government guaranteed free LPG refills to poor households
from April to June 2020.

Selected policy approaches
Strong government involvement and a comprehensive set of measures are needed to
support the expansion of clean cooking access. Many opportunities exist today for policy
makers to make short and medium-term progress on clean cooking:


Support affordability of clean cooking options through direct incentives for equipment
acquisition and fuel consumption for the poorest households. Options include
subsidies, tax or duty exemptions and pre-financing of upfront costs (e.g. for biogas
digesters, which have high upfront cost but almost no operational costs).



Establish price mechanisms to ensure energy affordability for low-income households
so as to increase household confidence in clean cooking solutions and reduce fuel
stacking.



Develop markets for stoves and fuels, encourage industry participation and private
equity investment. This includes enforcement of laws and regulations, financial
incentives and protocols to certify efficiency, emissions, and safety (e.g. safe cylinder
recirculation model).



Support the development of modern fuel infrastructure. This includes investment in
the production or import of modern fuels, distribution of cooking equipment and
transport infrastructure.



Support companies and non-governmental organisations to develop renewables-based
electric cooking solutions, and innovative business models such as pay-as-you-cook
using LPG, and to support increased use of non-fossil cooking fuels such as bio-LPG,
bioethanol and other upgraded biomass fuels.

IEA. All rights reserved

Economic implications
Expanding the use of clean cooking requires a diverse set of equipment and fuels, and
would create different types of jobs in rural and urban areas. In countries with adequate
resources, a biogas, bioethanol or upgraded biomass fuel industries would create
employment in rural areas for transforming feedstock into modern biomass. In countries
with existing manufacturing, the assembly and maintenance of modern cookstoves could
provide a major source of employment. Expansion of LPG services, which already employs
around 2 million people worldwide, could create 16-75 direct local jobs per million dollars
spent, depending on the specificities of the LPG market. A strong push for LPG with safe
cylinder circulation models would provide new jobs for bottling, distribution and retail, as
well as in cylinder manufacturing. Between 5 000 – 10 000 households would be provided
with access to clean cooking solutions for each million dollars invested.
78

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Fuel distribution pathways are evolving, with innovative business models making use of
digital technologies and mobile money services that create demand for new skills and jobs
in customer-care teleservices. The development of modern fuel industries would have an
impact on existing traditional biomass value chains which can be very labour intensive.
However, many of these jobs are informal, though measures could be implemented to
avoid negative impacts. If regulations ensure that jobs in new value chains are created in
the formal rather than the informal economy, the jobs created would be less vulnerable,
while also contributing taxes, benefiting public finances and the whole economy.
For households that currently pay for inefficient and unsafe cooking fuels, shifting to
modern cooking solutions can often lead to reduced energy bills, freeing income that can
be reinvested in the economy. In particular, pre-financing the high upfront capital cost of
biogas digesters would unlock savings, leading to major long-term benefits for households
(IEA, 2020i).

Implications for emissions and resilience
Cooking activities account for 1 Gt CO2-eq globally. One-fifth of these emissions come from
the inefficient combustion of wood or other fuels, which also produces methane (CH4),
nitrous oxide and black carbon. Increasing access to clean cooking would reduce these GHG
emissions as any increases in CO2 emissions from increased use of LPG or electricity would
be more than offset by lower methane and nitrous oxide emissions (Figure 2.22): emissions
from deforestation would also be reduced. While LPG is today one of the lowest CO2-eq
emitting cooking fuels available at scale, the development of less-emitting fuels for cooking
could further boost GHG emissions reductions in the long term. Biogas and bio-LPG look
like promising solutions: they could draw on local agricultural resources, and could
potentially be distributed in much the same way as LPG.

Reduction in premature deaths
100
80

GHG emissions

ktCO₂-eq

People per year

Figure 2.22 ⊳ Implications of spending 1 million dollars on clean cooking
2
1

60
-0
40
20

-1

IEA. All rights reserved

-2

CO₂
increase

CH₄ and N₂O
reduction

Net

Investing in access to clean cooking solutions saves lives, increases productivity
and reduces emissions.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

79

2

Household air pollution resulting from polluting and inefficient cooking solutions is linked
to around 2.5 million premature deaths every year. Achieving universal access to clean
cooking solutions by 2030 could avoid around 1.9 million premature deaths per year.
Investing in clean cooking would also avoid the one-and-a-half hours that are currently
spent on average every day collecting fuel wood, and reduce the four hours that are spent
cooking on average. These are burdens that fall disproportionally on women.

2.5

Industry

The Covid-19 crisis has led to a sharp slowdown in industrial activity around the world
(Table 2.3). This matters for both employment and emissions: one-in-four jobs globally are
in the industry sector, which accounts for around 30% of final energy use. Demand growth
for materials, such as cement was projected to be slow in 2020 even before the Covid-19
crisis, and now has been hit by a sudden halt in construction and other activities, plus an
expected downturn in future projects. The slowdown in economic activity is likely to be
disproportionately felt by small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in industry, which can be
very cash-flow sensitive and are often dependent on providing services to larger industry
players or acting as surge producers. Many companies have had to delay new projects and
plant upgrades, as well as idle some capacity or accelerate its retirement.
Table 2.3 ⊳

Impact of Covid-19 crisis on industrial sectors

Share of GDP in 2019
Production in 1st quarter
2020
(% year-on-year)

World

China

India

European
Union

United
States

Industry

28.2%

39.6%

29.2%

25.8%

18.4%

Industry

-5.4%

-9.4%

-3.3%

-5.8%

-2.1%

Steel

-1.4%

1.2%

-5.3%

-10.0%

-1.0%

Cement

-4.4%

-23.9%

-4.9%

-0.5%

7.7%

Petrochemicals*

-2.7%

-5.0%

-11.7%

-4.4%

-0.2%

Manufacturing

-9.2%

-7.7%

0.5%

-5.6%

-4.3%

Total jobs (million)

Industry

797

220

126

48

33

Share of total employment

Industry

23.0%

28.2%

25.6%

26.2%

19.8%

* Ethylene supply is taken as proxy for petrochemicals.

IEA. All rights reserved

Sources: IEA (2019c); Trading Economics (2020a); Trading Economics (2020b); Trading Economics (2020c);
Federal Reserve (2020); World Steel Association (2020); CEMNET (2020); CEIC (2020); S&P Global Platts
(2020); Institute for Supply Management (2020); Statista (2020); IHS (2020b); ILO (2020).

Steel production remained relatively robust amid rising oversupply concerns due to
contracting demand. Blast furnaces face technical limitations for flexible operation and
production cuts were short-lived in China, the world’s largest producer. Production of
petrochemical products has been affected by a growing overhang of capacity and a drop in
demand muted by a surge in demand for packaging and sanitary materials. The crisis has
also triggered delays or reversals to bans on single-use plastics, amid worries that reusable
plastics could spread the virus, and there has been a slowdown in recycling activity.
80

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

This section explores two particular measures to stimulate economic activity and generate
jobs in the industry sector (Figure 2.23). Investment in innovative industrial technologies
that could help develop new industrial capacity is also important in this context, which is
discussed in section 2.7.
Improve energy efficiency and electrification: Investment in energy efficiency would
create on average around 10 jobs per million dollars spent. These jobs could be created
rapidly, would provide immediate support for retrofitting and energy service jobs, and
would be effective in stabilising the ailing SME segment, where sizeable energy efficiency
potential remains untapped. Investment in more energy efficient industrial electric motors,
heat pumps for low-temperature process heat and agricultural irrigation pumps typically
have attractive payback periods: they could quickly generate savings that would allow
industry to increase expenditure on core business operations. Options for governments to
promote such investment include: tax deductions, guaranteed lending, rebates, cash-forreplacement schemes incentives for energy management systems and training and hiring
energy managers. In addition to the immediate increase in employment and positive longterm economic benefits, energy efficiency improves productivity, reduces import
dependency, saves emissions and strengthens crisis resilience.
Expand waste and material recycling: Recycling has gained momentum in recent years, but
is facing challenges from concerns about the re-use of plastics and from low prices for
virgin material as a result of Covid-19. Waste collection and sorting could be ramped up
quickly to provide support for jobs, with around 15-40 jobs created for every million dollars
of spending. Existing waste management systems could be improved by facilitating sorting,
improving product designs, and reforming taxes and levies.

Abatement cost

100

10

Payback period

Jobs per million dollars

200

Years

Dollars per tCO₂

Figure 2.23 ⊳ Performance of measures in the industry sector
8
6
0
4
-100

2

IEA. All rights reserved

Efficient electric motor

Net job creation

40
30
20
10

-200
Solar water pump

50

Heat pump

Industrial energy efficiency
Material recycling

Investment in energy efficiency, material recycling and innovative technologies would
help the industrial sector to create jobs and boost GDP while cutting CO2 emissions.
Note: tCO2 = tonnes of CO2.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

81

2

2.5.1

Improve energy efficiency and increase electrification

Industrial efficiency gains make up a large share of the potential for total energy intensity
improvements worldwide, and in recent years have seen annual investment of around
$40 billion. Improvements in industrial energy efficiency, however, are likely to stay at
relatively low levels in the short term, with low capacity utilisation and low fuel prices
extending payback periods in the current crisis and its aftermath. SMEs are key
stakeholders for realising wholesale changes in energy efficiency, but many are facing
financial difficulties and cannot easily fund retrofits and investment.

Selected policy approaches
Industrial energy efficiency could be stimulated by direct financial incentives, tax
deductions, accelerated depreciation and government-backed lending. Rebate and cashfor-replacement programmes could accelerate retrofits of industrial motors (e.g. to IE3+
worldwide, IE4 in advanced economies irrigation and heat pumps). 10 SMEs should also be
incentivised to adopt energy management systems and to improve the energy efficiency of
their operations. Policy instruments could incentivise the achievement of energy savings by
making support conditional on audited energy savings.

Economic implications
Energy efficiency is a cost-effective means of improving productivity in many industrial
sectors. Payback periods for investment in electric motors, industrial low-temperature heat
pumps and other industrial efficiency measures are generally attractive, even with the
current low fuel prices. Energy efficiency measures would quickly create new jobs at
retrofitters and energy service companies (ESCOs), especially in the ailing SME sector, and
in manufacturing and installation. There would be some job losses in some segments over
time, but the jobs created would greatly outnumber them (Figure 2.24). In aggregate, it is
estimated that industrial energy efficiency measures would create around 10 jobs per
million dollars invested.

Implications for emissions and resilience

IEA. All rights reserved

Implementing all cost-effective industrial energy efficiency measures would reduce
emissions in 2030 by around 2 Gt CO2 and would require around $50 billion additional
investment per year. The use of more efficient electric motors, which can have very
attractive payback periods, would provide around half of these savings and avoid more
than 1 200 TWh of energy use in 2030. Increased energy efficiency would improve the
resilience of local production to supply and price disruptions in the future, strengthen
domestic value chains, improve international competitiveness and reduce import
dependency.
10 Motors are benchmarked to the International Electro-technical Commission’s “International Efficiency”
standards, which range from low (IE0) to super premium (IE4), with minimum efficiency requirements based
on size and number of poles.

82

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Jobs per million dollars

Figure 2.24 ⊳ Job creation through investment in heat pumps
5
4

2

3
2
1
0
-1

Fossil fuels

Manufacturing

Installation

Maintenance

Investment in industrial heat pumps creates a net increase in jobs.

Box 2.4 ⊳

Irrigation pumps in agriculture

Agriculture is the single largest employer in the world. It sustains the livelihood of
3.1 billion people, many of them living in poverty. Increasing the productivity of this
sector is widely recognised as an effective means of stimulating socio-economic
development and fighting poverty. Every 10% increase in farm yield leads to an
estimated 7% reduction in poverty in Africa and 5% reduction in poverty in Asia (UNEP,
2012).

Million units

Figure 2.25 ⊳ Estimated stock of agricultural irrigation pumps in India
30

Grid-connected
Solar
Diesel

20

10

IEA. All rights reserved

2010

2014

2018

2022

India has a programme to boost deployment of solar-powered irrigation pumps in
agro-industries. These offer large potential benefits for productivity and local jobs.
Sources: MNRE (2020); Mercom India (2020); Thouthang and Kumar (2019); Shakti Sustainable Energy
Foundation (2017); India Times (2019); Garg (2018); TERI (2014); UN University (2014).

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

83

Energy efficiency measures offer a major opportunity for productivity gains and
resource savings in agro-industries. Electrifying and improving the motors used in water
pumps, ventilation and air circulation yields savings of up to 30%. India’s government
programmes have added around 0.5 million new pumps each year since 2010,
accounting now for around 20 million electrified pumps (Figure 2.25). Options to
combine pumps with solar photovoltaics (PV) reduce payback periods and provide
potential further benefits in terms of jobs, environmental impact and resilience,
especially when accompanied by measures to tackle over-irrigation practices.

2.5.2

Expand waste and material recycling

The production of industrial materials is energy intensive, and accounts for around 30% of
total final energy consumption worldwide. Implementing economically viable recycling
technologies can shorten supply chains, increase resilience and create new jobs, while
reducing additional demand for virgin materials. An increasing number of moves have been
made in a number of countries and businesses to increase recycled plastic content and ban
or reduce one-time use plastics. However, less than 20% of plastic is recycled today
because of low collection rates and technical sorting challenges. Recycling rates are higher
for metals and paper, but there are still huge variations in rates between countries. The
Covid-19 crisis has added to the challenges. Lockdowns led to the temporary closure of
waste and recycling operations in many countries; the halt in construction activity has
affected scrap availability for secondary metal production; and the plastic recycling industry
has been hit by policy changes and by a reduction in the value of recycled product as a
result of low oil prices.

Selected policy approaches
In advanced economies, existing waste management systems can be enhanced by
facilitating sorting, standardising and improving product designs to adequately account for
end-of-life aspects, and reforming taxes and levies on waste and scrap. Well-designed
“cash-for-clunkers” programmes have the co-benefit of increasing scrap availability for
secondary electrified steel making, aluminium and petrochemicals.
In developing economies, where 15-20 million waste pickers work in the informal sector,
progress could be made by equipping municipalities with the financial resources to take
ownership of waste management. Also by encouraging the installation of new waste
collection and sorting technologies and adopt best practices for collection.

IEA. All rights reserved

Economic implications
Waste and material recycling has large job creation potential, especially in developing
countries, where establishing recycling industries creates around 15-40 jobs per million
dollars of investment (Figure 2.26). Measures to improve recycling would cost more than
an additional $500 per tonne of waste processed (with variations across materials, but
would bring benefits in terms of health, environment and reduced GHG emissions).
84

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Jobs per million dollars

Figure 2.26 ⊳ Net job creation of recycling per million dollars of spending
50
40

2

30
20
10

Steel

Aluminium

Pulp and paper

Plastic

Increased recycling has large job creation potential,
particularly in segments where collection and sorting is labour intensive.

Implications for emissions and resilience
Increasing global average recycling rates (for all materials) from around 41% today to 47%
in 2030 would reduce emissions from material production by around 20% from today.
Growth in recycling would be likely to come primarily from plastics and steel, where current
rates are lower than for paper and aluminium. Recycling and scrap usage reduces
environmental damage, adverse health effects and import dependency. It also reduces
landfill disposal and incineration, and the costs associated with landfills. Today, 37% of
global waste goes to landfills and the open burning of waste is associated with significant
negative health impacts.

IEA. All rights reserved

2.6

Fuels

Oil and natural gas meet more than half of global primary energy demand today and the oil
and gas industries employ around 13 million people in upstream operations, refining and
processing, transport and distribution and services. The Covid-19 pandemic has had a major
impact on markets, particularly for oil, and oil demand is expected to be around 8.5% lower
in 2020 than in 2019. There have also been sudden short-term shocks in both supply and
demand that were well in excess of the industry’s near-term capacity to adapt: in April
2020, oil demand was around 25% lower than a year ago, and prices have been very
volatile. A number of countries have responded to lower prices by building up their
strategic petroleum reserves, while a number of companies have announced sharp
downward revisions to investment plans. We expect global upstream oil and gas
investment to fall by almost one-third from 2019 levels, and around 1.2 million workers in
the oil and gas industry at risk of losing their jobs. The reduction in the oil price has made
Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

85

products such as LPG cheaper but alternative fuels such as sustainable biofuels more
expensive. Biofuels have been hit harder than any other forms of renewable energy to
date: demand is expected to fall by around 15% in 2020.
This section examines the implications of the Covid-19 crisis on methane emissions from oil
and gas operations, fossil fuel subsidies and biofuels, and the extent to which sectors could
contribute to an overall sustainable recovery programme.
Reduce methane emissions from oil and gas operations: We estimate that it is technically
possible to reduce around three-quarters of the current 82 Mt of methane emissions that
are released from oil and gas operations each year. Some of the skilled oil and gas workers
at risk of being laid off because of Covid-19 could be re-trained to work on abatement
programmes: we estimate that around 4 jobs would be created for every million dollars
spent to reduce oil and gas-related methane emissions. The economics of monitoring,
reduction, and methane prevention measures and programmes are likely to be impacted by
the drop in natural gas prices. Continued and enhanced government support to address
gaps in information, infrastructure and investment will be important to ensure the oil and
gas industry tackles its methane emissions. It would be cost effective to deploy nearly all
technically available abatement options at a GHG price of $15/tonne CO2-eq.

IEA. All rights reserved

Reform fossil fuel subsidies: The global value of fossil fuel consumption subsidies in 2019
was around $320 billion. Without any changes to existing subsidy regimes, this is likely to
fall to $180 billion in 2020 because of the drop in oil and gas prices. However, oil and gas
income in producer economies in 2020 is likely to drop by nearly $800 billion – a reduction
of 55% on 2019 levels. Phasing out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies would create new budget
space, remove economic distortions and make room for more spending to boost long-term
economic growth; the dramatic fall in oil and gas prices also offers opportunities to cut
inefficient subsidies without increasing end-user prices. Reform programmes need to
carefully consider national circumstances, not least the need to keep energy affordable for
the poorest in society.
Support and expand the use of biofuels: The liquid biofuel industry employed around
2.1 million people in 2018, and is a critical employer of both low and high skilled workers
across many countries. However, a significant share of production capacity has been idled
or is operating at reduced capacity as a result of the slowdown in overall liquid fuel
demand. New policies and targeted support – which should be closely linked to meeting
appropriate sustainability criteria – could help stabilise the industry and create a large
number of new jobs in a short period of time. We estimate that each million dollars of
investment would create around 15-30 jobs, a significant proportion of which would be in
rural areas (Figure 2.27). Investment in sustainable biofuel production and consumption
infrastructure could also have other long-term benefits such as offsetting the need for oil
imports and supporting demand for nationally important agricultural commodities.
Sustainable biofuels also have a potentially important part to play in reducing emissions
from sectors that are challenging for low-carbon electricity to reach such as heavy-duty
vehicles, aviation and shipping.
86

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Figure 2.27 ⊳ Investment impacts on jobs, abatement costs and fossil fuel
Jobs

30

20

150

Abatement costs

Billion dollars

40

Dollars per tCO₂-eq

Jobs per million dollars

subsidies

100

500

Fossil fuel subsidies

2

400
300

50
200

10

0

Methane

Biofuels

- 50

100

Methane Biofuels

2015

2020e

There is scope to phase out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies, to intensify efforts
to tackle methane emissions and to support sustainable biofuels.
Notes: tCO2 = tonnes of carbon dioxide; 2020e = estimated value for 2020. Biofuels numbers are for fuel
ethanol.

2.6.1

Reduce methane emissions from oil and gas operations

Estimates of methane emissions are subject to a high degree of uncertainty, but the most
recent comprehensive estimate suggests that annual global methane emissions from
human activity are around 350 Mt (Figure 2.5). The largest sources of anthropogenic
methane emissions are the agriculture and energy sectors, which includes emissions from
coal, oil, natural gas and bioenergy. We estimate that oil- and gas-related methane
emissions in 2019 were around 82 Mt, equivalent to around 2.5 Gt CO2-eq (assuming that
one tonne of methane is equivalent to 30 tonnes of CO2, the 100-year global warming
potential.)

IEA. All rights reserved

There is a great deal of uncertainty over what might happen to methane emissions in 2020.
While global emissions of CO2 will fall this year, a similar reduction in methane emissions
from oil and gas cannot be taken for granted. The drop in natural gas prices means that
many reduction and prevention measures are now less cost effective to deploy than was
previously the case. Declines in revenues from oil and gas operations may also mean that
companies pay less attention to efforts to tackle methane emissions; regulatory oversight
of oil and gas operations could also be scaled back.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

87

Figure 2.28 ⊳ Sources of methane emissions

Natural

Wetlands

Anthropogenic

Other

Agriculture

Oil

Energy

Gas

Waste
Biomass
burning

Coal
Bioenergy
50

100

150

200
Mt

Agriculture and energy sectors are the two largest sources of anthropogenic
methane emissions: oil and gas operations caused around 82 Mt of emissions in 2019.
Sources: Non-energy data for the year 2012 (the latest year for which reliable estimates are available),
Sauonis (2016); energy data for the year 2019, IEA (2020j).

Selected policy approaches
Continued and enhanced government support for reduction programmes will be important
to ensure that methane emissions fall in the coming years. Strengthening efforts to reduce
methane emissions could form an important part of any support that may be offered to the
oil and gas industry. In Canada, for example, around US$550 million is included in a federal
stimulus package to help oil and gas companies reduce methane emissions. Examples of
policies and approaches to encourage or require methane emissions reductions include:


Encourage direct measurement: To improve understanding of the issue, help measure
progress against goals, and develop and refine objectives and targets.



Ensure transparency on data and methods: Essential for credible reporting, which
would be strengthened through third-party verification.



Introduce quantitative targets: Reduction commitments are included in some
Nationally Determined Contributions (e.g. Canada) and their use could be expanded.



Establish well-designed regulations: Including how oversight will be carried out, the
institutional arrangements for enforcement and penalties for non-compliance.

IEA. All rights reserved

Economic implications
We expect oil and gas companies to cut upstream investment in 2020 by around one-third
compared with 2019 levels. A large portion of the pain arising from this will be felt by
companies providing oil field services and supplies. We estimate that around 1.2 million oil
and gas jobs could be lost in 2020, or around 10% of the workforce. Jobs servicing the shale
88

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

sector would be hardest hit, but the effects would be widely felt across the industry.
Incentivising reductions in oil and gas methane emissions could make use of some of the
skilled members of the oil and gas service sector who are laid off. We estimate that it is
technically possible today to reduce around 75% of current oil and gas methane emissions.
Around $15 billion spending would be required annually to fully realise this reduction.
Figure 2.29 ⊳ Marginal abatement cost curve for oil- and gas-related methane
Dollars per MBtu

emissions by mitigation measure, 2019

Replace existing devices
Instrument air systems
Pumps
Electric motor
Compressor seal or rod
Early device replacement
Install new devices
Vapour recovery units
Blowdown capture
Flares
Plunger
Leak detection and repair
Upstream
Downstream

8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
0

10

20

30

40

50

60
Mt

Other

It is technically possible to reduce methane emissions from oil and gas operations by
nearly 60 Mt; many of these emissions could be avoided at no net cost.
Note: MBtu = million British thermal units.

IEA. All rights reserved

Some of the opportunities for reducing oil and gas methane emissions can be quite labour
intensive. For example, leak detection and repair programmes are required to identify and
fix sources of fugitive (or accidental) methane emissions. There have been many recent
advances in remotely detecting methane emissions through the use of satellites, planes
and drones. This expedites the process of finding leaks but operators are still needed to
repair these leaks. Similarly, vented emissions can occur during the normal operation of
equipment along the oil and gas value chains, and dealing with these requires operators to
replace or retrofit existing pieces of equipment. Taken together, around 4 jobs would be
created on average globally for every million dollars invested in reducing fugitive and
vented methane emissions.
While natural gas prices are generally much lower than in the past, we estimate, on the
basis of 2019 prices, that around one-third of methane emissions from oil and gas
operations could be avoided at no net cost. This is because the value of the captured
methane is higher than the cost of deploying the measure. Around $5 billion spending
would be required to mobilise these reductions, but these would end up saving natural gas
worth nearly $10 billion each year.
Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

89

2

Implications for emissions and resilience
Many of the international oil companies as well as a number of national oil companies have
set individual or collective targets to restrict methane emissions or the emissions intensity
of production. However there are limits to what can be achieved by voluntary action
because the pool of those willing to take such action is limited, and because the actions
themselves may fall short of what is desirable from a public policy perspective. Because
methane is a very potent greenhouse gas, even those measures that cost more money than
they save are a very cost-effective way to reduce GHG emissions. For example, with a GHG
price of only $15/tonne CO2-eq, it would be cost effective to deploy all abatement options,
i.e. to reduce total emissions by around 75%. Governments will therefore play a critical role
in helping to reduce methane emissions.
Methane emissions of 82 Mt are equivalent to around 145 billion cubic metres of natural
gas. This represents less than 5% of global natural gas consumption, but reducing leaks and
the flaring of natural gas could substantially improve the trade position of a number of
natural gas producers and exporters. There is also increasing interest in differentiating
sources of natural gas by the GHG emissions intensity of their production, and the level of
methane emissions is the largest component of this. For natural gas exporters, ensuring
that methane emissions are kept as low as possible could therefore be an important factor
in ensuring the resilience of gas export markets. Natural gas importers could reinforce this
incentive by announcing and implementing pathways towards procuring natural gas that
entails the smallest possible methane leaks in production and transport.

2.6.2

Reform fossil fuel subsidies

IEA. All rights reserved

Fossil fuel consumption subsidies lower the price of fossil fuels or fossil fuel-based
electricity to end-use consumers. Many major oil and gas exporting countries have
traditionally provided very cheap energy to their populations, though a number of
importing countries also subsidise the use of fossil fuels. In 2019, the global value of fossil
fuel consumption subsidies was around $320 billion. If there were to be no changes in
pricing regimes, we estimate that total fossil fuel subsidies would fall to around $180 billion
in 2020 because of the drop in oil and gas prices. However a number of countries have
introduced additional price interventions, particularly in the electricity sector, to protect
newly vulnerable consumers and so this number may increase.
Many of the world’s key producer economies cut oil production in response to the collapse
in oil demand, and along with the fall in prices, this will have a major impact on their public
finances. If the oil price were to remain at $30/barrel for the remainder of 2020, oil and gas
income in economies with fossil fuel subsidies would be nearly $800 billion lower in 2020
than in 2019 (Figure 2.5). Beginning, or accelerating, reforms to inefficient fossil fuel
subsidy regimes could provide some relief to their fiscal positions. While the reduction in
oil and gas revenues may undercut some of the means of supporting these reforms, the
dramatic fall in oil and gas prices presents an opportunity to cut subsidies without

90

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

increasing end-use prices. The drop in oil and gas prices may also offer the opportunity for
all countries to introduce or strengthen effective or real carbon prices (see Chapter 3).
Figure 2.30 ⊳ Net income from oil and gas production and fossil fuel
Billion dollars

consumption subsidies, 2015-2020

1 500

Net income
after subsidies
Consumption
subsidies

1 000

500

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020e

If there are no changes in pricing regimes, fossil fuel subsidies will fall by around
$140 billion in 2020, but net income from oil and gas will fall by nearly $800 billion.
Notes: 2020e = estimated values for 2020. Net income is total revenue from oil and gas sales minus finding,
development and operating costs, and domestic fossil fuel subsidies. Figures for 2020 based on an oil price
of $30/barrel for 2020 and no changes in end-user pricing. Includes data for 41 countries with fossil fuel
subsidy regimes.

Selected policy approaches

IEA. All rights reserved

While there may be fiscal pressure to enact reforms to fossil fuel pricing regimes, there are
also social and political sensitivities, not least the need to tackle energy poverty and keep
energy affordable, especially in periods of crisis. National circumstances mean that there is
no single path to follow when reforming inefficient fossil fuel subsidies, but governments
may consider to:


Aim to ensure that prices reflect the full economic cost of the energy that is being
supplied, and that pricing systems are transparent, well-monitored and enforced.



Introduce reforms in stages to avoid any abrupt or large price rises that may be
difficult for some parts of the population to absorb.



Implement parallel reforms to protect vulnerable groups. For example, there might be
a strong case for targeting conditional cash transfers to those who lack reliable access
to clean cooking fuels and electricity (see section 2.4.3).



Accompany reforms with a comprehensive communication strategy that persuades
citizens of the need for reform and that it is being implemented in a just manner.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

91

2

Economic implications
Many existing subsidies disproportionally benefit wealthier segments of the population
that use more of the subsidised fuel. Such untargeted subsidy policies encourage wasteful
consumption and increase pressure on budgets that in many cases are already under strain
from dealing with the immediate health and economic crises. Phasing out fossil fuel
subsidies would create new budget space and remove economic distortions thereby
facilitating spending to flow to more productive uses and boost long-term economic
growth. Many of the world’s key producer economies also have abundant wind and solar
resources and removing inefficient fossil fuel subsidies would create a more level playing
field for these energy sources.

Implications for emissions and resilience
If we assume that fossil fuel subsidies are fully phased out by 2030 in all regions except the
Middle East (where the average subsidisation rate is reduced to around 25% by 2030
compared with around 55% today), then global CO2 emissions in 2030 would be around
700 Mt lower than they would have been otherwise (Figure 2.31). That could lead to even
greater emissions savings if some of the financial savings are directed towards other
efficiency and low-carbon measures.
Figure 2.31 ⊳ Emissions savings in 2030 from a gradual phase-out of fossil fuel
Mt CO₂

consumption subsidies by region

300
250
200
150
100
50
Middle East

Africa

Asia

Latin America

Eurasia and
Ukraine

IEA. All rights reserved

Emissions would be around 700 Mt lower in 2030 with a phase-out of fossil fuel subsidies.

For exporting countries with large subsidy regimes, economic diversification into non-oil
economic activities would improve their economic and social resilience. Given the
importance of these countries to global oil and production, such diversification might also
reduce commodity price volatility and aid the overall resilience of global energy markets.
For importing countries, reducing fossil fuel subsidies would reduce domestic consumption
92

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

and import requirements. Diverting this spending to support other domestic energy
sources would also improve overall self-sufficiency.

2.6.3

Support and expand the use of biofuels

Just over 2 million barrels of oil equivalent per day (mboe/d) of biofuels were consumed
globally in 2019 (expressed in energy-equivalent volumes of gasoline and diesel). Around
80% of consumption occurs because of policies that mandate blending with fossil fuels for
transport. The containment measures to combat the Covid-19 pandemic that strongly
reduced transport fuel demand have also lowered biofuel demand, and this has had a
dramatic impact on the biofuels industry.
Biofuel production is expected to fall by around 13% in 2020 (Figure 2.32), which
has damaged the profitability of production and has led to a significant share of global
biofuel production capacity being idled or operating at reduced capacity. Markets
integrated with biofuels have also been affected: for example, there is now less demand
for agricultural feedstocks used in biofuel production, and lower availability of
co-products (e.g. animal feeds and CO2 for beverages and cooling). Before the
Covid-19 crisis, there was an expectation that biofuel consumption would grow in
2020 as a result of strengthened policies in a number of countries, and of rising
fuel demand in markets with existing mandates. However, several countries in
Southeast Asia have now delayed planned mandate increases, plus the introduction
of Brazil’s flagship RenovaBio policy could be disrupted.

mb/d

Figure 2.32 ⊳ Historical and projected global biofuels production
2.5

Biodiesel and HVO

2.0

Ethanol

1.5

Forecast prior to
Covid-19 crisis

1.0
0.5

IEA. All rights reserved

2017

2018

2019

2020e

Biofuel production in 2020 is likely to be around 15% lower
than expected before the Covid-19 crisis.
Note: mb/d = million barrels of oil equivalent per day; HVO = hydrotreated vegetable oil; 2020e = estimated
values for 2020.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

93

2

Selected policy approaches
New policies and a targeted support could help stabilise the biofuel industry and create a
large number of new jobs in a short period of time. Blending shares could be raised in
regions that are not yet at the technical limits of fuel blending in road transport, and
support provided for fuels that are not subject to blending limits or that can be used in
long-distance transport. 11 Specific policies to support the biofuel industry, which should be
closely linked to meeting appropriate sustainability criteria, include:


Change fuel tax regimes to boost the consumption of biofuel blends and markets for
“drop-in” fuels (which can be used unblended or at high blend shares without
modifications to engines) and flex-fuel vehicles.



Extend programmes to supply biofuels at service stations.



Implement financial de-risking measures to modernise production facilities and
construct new plants that produce biofuels from low-carbon wastes and residues.



Mobilise programmes for the collection and supply of sustainable waste and residue
feedstocks for hydrotreated vegetable oil (HVO).

Economic implications
Biofuels production is one of the most labour-intensive energy industries. The liquid biofuel
industry employed around 2.1 million people in 2018 (IRENA, 2019), and was the secondlargest source of renewable energy jobs after solar PV. Around $2.5 billion was invested in
liquid biofuels in 2019, less than 20% of levels seen ten years ago. Job creation and
production has grown despite this drop, in part because of increasing production in
countries with labour-intensive agriculture. The number of people employed in the sector
increased by around 40% between 2013 and 2018, while biofuel production increased by
around 25%. In recent years, we estimate that around 15-30 jobs were created for every
million dollars of investment.
Ethanol accounts for around 70% of total biofuel consumption today (by volume). In the
United States, the world’s largest global producer, around 45% of employment is in
agricultural activity to produce feedstock, 30% is in production facilities, and the remainder
is in professional services and trade. In countries with less mechanised agriculture, the
share of jobs in feedstock production is much higher.

IEA. All rights reserved

Planting, harvesting and logistics jobs are seasonal in nature, and can be informal in many
developing countries. Large-scale biofuel production facilities take around two to three
years to build, requiring a large number of construction workers. Once commissioned,
there are skilled permanent technical and professional staff associated with O&M and the
logistics of fuel supply. Building a more extensive advanced biofuel industry would require

11 Bioethanol and biodiesel are generally blended with gasoline and diesel up to volumes of less than 10%,

although there are some instances of blending of up to 30%.

94

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

highly skilled research and development personnel as well as specialised roles to collect
and pre-treat the waste and residue feedstocks that are used. 12

Implications for emissions and resilience
A key benefit of biofuels is that they can reduce emissions compared with the use of oil
products. Biofuels will be particularly critical to lowering emissions from transport modes
where it is technically challenging to use low-carbon electricity such as heavy-duty vehicles,
aviation and shipping.
The choice of feedstock and source of process energy used significantly affects the overall
emissions reduction potential of biofuels. CO2 emissions from ethanol are between 30-70%
lower than gasoline. 13 In the United States and Brazil (which account for around 80% of
global production), ethanol production has an abatement cost of $20-120/tCO2 for crude oil
prices ranging from $30-60/barrel.
There is growing interest in the use of alternative feedstocks that can avoid the potential
sustainability concerns associated with some conventional biofuels. Use of waste and
residue feedstocks can also provide deeper emission reductions of around 80-90%
compared with fossil fuels for transport. However the maturity of these technologies
varies. Producing biodiesel and HVO from lipid feedstocks is a mature technology, 14 and has
an abatement cost of $150-250/tCO2 (for crude oil prices from $30-60/barrel). Other
technologies, such as converting solid waste and residue biomass feedstocks into liquid
biofuels, are not yet widely commercialised, although some plants do exist.
Support for conventional biofuels is strong in oil importing countries and regions where
agriculture is an important contributor to GDP, as is the case in many countries in
developing Asia. Biofuel blending can offset a share of import demand and therefore
enhance security of supply, while also supporting demand for nationally important
agricultural commodities and the associated jobs.
There are a number of additional co-benefits of developing bioenergy industries.
Sustainable bioenergy can provide employment and income for rural communities, and
health benefits from reduced air pollution and proper waste management. It can also
promote sustainable forest and agricultural management and improve resource efficiency.

12 Advanced biofuels are produced from non-food crop feedstocks, result in significantly fewer GHG
emissions than fossil fuels, do not compete with food for agricultural land, and do not adversely affect
sustainability.

IEA. All rights reserved

13 These figures exclude emissions from land-use change over which there is a large level of uncertainty.

Including land-use change emissions would mean that bioethanol would reduce emissions by around 15-70%
compared with gasoline.
14 Lipid feedstocks include waste and residue fats, oils and greases.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

95

2

2.7

Strategic opportunities in technology innovation

The lag time involved in bringing technologies to market mean that clean energy
technology innovation remains a near-term priority to achieve longer term sustainability
targets. Without innovation, the transition to modern, clean and resilient energy systems
would be at risk. Governments have a major role to play in supporting innovation,
especially in areas that the private sector perceives as being too risky. Clean energy
technology innovation matters in the recovery from the Covid-19 pandemic and its
economic aftermath because it can help with:


Energy resilience and security of supply: For governments, a broader technology
portfolio is a means to build domestic resilience by diversifying the energy mix and
energy supply chains. For energy industries, energy technology innovation is a means
to diversify portfolios and anticipate changes in energy markets.



Future competitiveness: Innovation can help industries come out of the Covid-19 crisis
better positioned to supply future domestic and international markets.



Emissions reductions: In sectors where few scalable decarbonisation options currently
exist, such as heavy industry and long-distance transport, technology innovation has a
vital role to play in helping to ensure that new clean energy technologies help
countries reach emissions reduction goals.

Figure 2.33 ⊳ Global average jobs created per million dollars of capital
Jobs per million dollars

spending for emerging technologies

12
10
8
6
4
2
Hydrogen

Batteries

CCUS

IEA. All rights reserved

Manufacturing of emerging technologies is not a near-term job engine, but
employment effects can ripple through the supply chain and be future growth areas.

In this section, we examine four specific technology areas at different levels of maturity
that could be important elements of a future technology portfolio and that require support
in different ways: hydrogen technologies, which have a potentially important role in a wide
96

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

range of sectors; batteries, which are very important for electrification of road transport
and the integration of renewables in power markets; small modular nuclear reactors, which
have technology attributes that make them scalable as an important low-carbon option in
the power sector; and carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS), which could play a
critical role in the energy sector reaching net-zero emissions. We also compare the nearterm job creation potential of some of these measures (Figure 2.33).
Clean energy technology innovation is a complex and important topic, and it goes much
wider than the question of support for specific technology areas. The IEA is preparing an
Energy Technology Perspectives Special Report on Clean Energy Technology Innovation,
which will be released in early July 2020. This report will examine in detail the ways in
which governments can shape and support a broad research development and
demonstration agenda in pursuit of the long-term decarbonisation of the energy sector.

2.7.1

Hydrogen technologies

Hydrogen is a versatile energy carrier that can be produced from fossil and low-carbon
sources. A future more resilient energy sector could make use of clean hydrogen in
industrial applications (such as iron and steel production or in the fertiliser industry),
transport (directly in road vehicles such as trucks and cars, or as synthetic fuels in airplanes
and ships) and buildings (for heating). It could also be used to store electricity over weeks
or months. If hydrogen use is to become widespread, it needs targeted support for lowcarbon production, and for efforts to stimulate hydrogen demand in sectors where the
near-term opportunities are largest.
Most hydrogen production today takes place in industrial hubs such as ports using natural
gas and coal as an input. Some industries are looking to adopt CCUS to reduce emissions
from production: there are also a number of planned projects for hydrogen electrolysers
which would produce hydrogen from decarbonised electricity. If these projects were to be
completed, global electrolyser capacity would rise from 170 megawatts (MW) in 2019 to
730 MW in 2021. The Covid-19 crisis may put some of these plans at risk, although no
project cancellations have yet been reported.

IEA. All rights reserved

In the transport sector, current sales of hydrogen fuel cell vehicles are low and have been
hit hard by the crisis: in the United States, sales fell by 65% year-on-year during January to
April 2020; in China, they fell by 7% over January to March. In industry, the main near-term
opportunities for growth come from the scope to blend hydrogen into commercial steelproducing assets and to use clean hydrogen in place of fossil fuel hydrogen in the
production chemicals such as ammonia and methanol. A pilot for steel production with
clean hydrogen is currently under construction. While pilots are at risk of being delayed
due to the Covid-19 crisis, no delays have yet been announced.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

97

2

Selected policy approaches
Support for electrolyser manufacturing can usefully be paired with support for fuel cells
and battery manufacturing, which use the same principles of electrochemistry as
electrolysers and have several similar components. Support for the use of CCUS with
existing fossil fuel-based hydrogen production would be best focused on industrial hubs to
maximise synergies with the use of CO2 pipelines and related infrastructure. The
opportunities for clean hydrogen production would be bolstered by support for new
hydrogen demand through blending clean hydrogen into natural gas grids and support for
increased use of hydrogen in transport, industry and buildings. Specific support measures
for hydrogen might include:


Support for developing or expanding electrolyser manufacturing capacity through lowinterest loans and blended finance for factories.



Support for clean hydrogen production through targets and quotas.



Maintain and reinforce market pull instruments for hydrogen end-use technologies
and related infrastructure (e.g. hydrogen refuelling stations).



Introduce clear and quantifiable targets for the use of clean hydrogen in existing
infrastructure (e.g. hydrogen blending in gas networks and for steel production).



Provide funding for research into fuel cell efficiency, and electrolyser efficiency and
flexibility, together with funding for large electrolyser demonstration plants.

Economic and other implications
A readily available way to create new demand for clean hydrogen is to require its blending
in natural gas pipelines. This would create predictable demand for clean hydrogen while
reducing the emissions intensity of natural gas supplies. If hydrogen were blended into all
natural gas use in the European Union at 5% (by volume), clean hydrogen demand would
be boosted by 2.5 Mt per year. If this were supplied by electrolysers, then it would require
almost 25 GW of relevant capacity. Electrolysers could also be used to provide clean
hydrogen in industrial clusters, such as at ports. This would create jobs and provide
measurable benefits throughout the industrial value chain. Other support to increase
hydrogen demand in transport and other sectors could also have positive economic effects
and create jobs, including in the development and maintenance of related infrastructure.

IEA. All rights reserved

2.7.2

Batteries

The pace of battery manufacturing capacity growth has been rapid in recent years and
there is enormous potential for batteries in an increasing number of sectors, including the
power and road transport sectors. The cost of lithium-ion batteries, widely used in
consumer electronics, has declined sharply in recent years. In 2019, sales-weighted electric
car battery pack prices reached an average price of $160 per kilowatt-hour (kWh), down
from more than $1 100/kWh in 2010 (BNEF, 2019). Governments in many countries have

98

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

contributed to this progress through policies encouraging electric car sales, therefore
indirectly stimulating innovation in battery manufacturing processes and performance.
Although the power sector now offers increasing opportunities for the use of batteries to
support intra-day changes in demand and to help the integration of variable renewables,
the current focus of battery manufacturing capacity for the energy sector is on electric cars.
At present there is capacity to produce around 320 GWh of batteries globally each year.
China is the world leader, accounting for around 70% of global capacity, followed by the
United States (13%), Korea (7%), Europe (4%) and Japan (3%). In China, the outbreak of
Covid-19 has affected battery production hubs in Hubei, Hunan and Guangdong;
manufacturing has only resumed gradually.

Selected policy approaches
If existing announced targets for electric vehicle production by car manufacturers were to
be met, around 1 000 GWh of battery manufacturing capacity would be needed by 2025 to
supply electric cars alone. Announced targets by a number of leading battery
manufacturers would provide around 2 100 GWh annual battery manufacturing capacity in
2030, but additional battery manufacturing capacity is nevertheless likely to be required to
supply the growing demands of the power sector. Deployment of utility-scale battery
storage systems is rapidly expanding, with an increasing number of auction schemes
awarding long-term contracts for battery storage.
Public support for battery manufacturing would be bolstered if it were to be co-ordinated
with plans for transport and power sectors to ensure a business case for batteries and to
share lessons from experience in the manufacturing, use, recycling and repurposing of
batteries. Specific support measures for battery manufacturing might include:


Support the expansion of battery manufacturing capacity and infrastructure for the
collection, recycling and repurposing of batteries at the end of their lives through lowinterest loans and blended finance.



Provide targeted support for battery demand to build industry confidence, for example
by incentivising the roll-out of electric vehicles in the transport sector.



Provide RD&D funding for sustainable battery technologies, advances in battery
chemistry and control systems to improve energy and power density as well as
lifespan.

IEA. All rights reserved

Economic and other implications
Batteries are set to play a crucial role in a wide range of sectors, with major implications for
economic performance as well as for clean energy transitions. The development of local
battery manufacturing capacity could also boost jobs in electric vehicle manufacturing and
in the provision of support to energy storage systems.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

99

2

2.7.3

Small modular nuclear reactors

Difficulties in financing the construction of large-scale nuclear reactors are driving interest
in small modular nuclear reactors (SMRs). SMRs are generally defined as nuclear reactors
with an electrical capacity of less than 300 MW per module, which are built in a factory and
then transported to the generation site. Several different types of SMRs are under
development: light water-cooled SMR designs have achieved the highest technology and
licensing readiness levels with several concepts under construction or advanced in the
licensing process. The development of liquid metal-cooled SMRs, molten salt-cooled and
gas-cooled SMR designs are less advanced. SMR designs are under development in
countries such as Canada, China, Russia and the United States, although none has yet
reached commercial maturity.
SMRs offer the possibility of providing low-carbon nuclear power with lower initial capital
investment and better scalability than traditional larger reactors, and with the ability to use
sites that would be unable to accommodate traditional large reactors. Construction leadtimes are also expected to be much shorter as a result of factory manufacturing and the
use of advanced modular construction techniques.
SMRs could help provide flexibility in countries with large electricity grids, or be used in
countries or regions with small electricity grids that would not be appropriate for large
baseload nuclear power plants. Given their lower expected costs, they may also be
attractive to countries with no experience with nuclear power, especially those with small
and less robust electricity grids. In some cases, notably where there are grid stability and
reliability concerns, SMRs may be the only technically feasible nuclear technology option
available.

Selected policy approaches
Support for SMRs would need to take due account of the general principles of low-carbon
electricity market design with innovation policy support to facilitate early deployment.
Examples of specific policy measures that could be employed include:


Provide investment support for pilot projects such as capital grants, loan guarantees
and tailor-made long-term contracts.



Foster cost-sharing agreements for international collaboration, shared RD&D
programmes, and national and international licensing frameworks.



Support regulatory authorities to accelerate the resolution of concerns on the
validation of innovative safety features and factory assembly.

IEA. All rights reserved

Economic and other implications
SMRs have the potential to provide an alternative pathway for the development of nuclear
power, and could provide a large number of jobs in design, manufacturing, supply and
construction activities. However, the prospects for SMRs will depend to a large extent on
the successful deployment of prototypes and first-of-a-kind plants (NEA and OECD, 2016).
An important goal is to establish standardised designs which would allow the development
of value chains and accelerate economies of scale, learning and cost reductions.
100

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

2.7.4

Carbon capture, utilisation and storage

Carbon capture, utilisation and storage technologies have an important role to play in the
development of sustainable and resilient energy systems. They have the potential to
support deep emissions cuts from existing power and industrial facilities and underpin
energy transition pathways, for example by facilitating clean hydrogen production.
Captured CO2 (from fossil or bioenergy sources) could be used as a feedstock for lowemission fuels, chemicals and building materials, while combining CO2 storage with
bioenergy or direct air capture could provide the foundation for carbon removal or
negative emissions.
The range of technologies and applications associated with CCUS presents significant and
varied opportunities for innovation. Some CCUS elements are commercially mature: CO2
capture (via chemical absorption and physical separation) has been applied in industry for
decades while the practice of injecting CO2 for enhanced oil recovery (CO2-EOR) dates back
to the 1970s. Other CCUS applications, including cement and steel production, are at an
earlier stage of development, as are technologies to convert CO2 into products such as
chemicals and fuels. These less advanced applications will benefit from continued
innovation and scaled demonstration to reduce costs and refine technologies.
There are 21 facilities today that capture CO2 in large volumes (between 0.6-8 Mt CO2 per
facility per year); these either store the CO2 in dedicated geological formations or use the
CO2 for EOR. Most of these facilities take CO2 from relatively high purity CO2 sources, such
as natural gas processing or hydrogen production. There are two large-scale facilities that
capture CO2 from coal-fired power generation and one that applies CCUS in steel
production.
Recent interest in CCUS has been concentrated in the United States and Europe, where
around 25 projects are in various stages of development. Plans for new facilities have been
announced in the Middle East and Australia. As with other clean energy investments, these
plans are subject to increased uncertainty and potential delays as a result of the Covid-19
related economic downturn. Almost all will rely on some form of policy support or incentive
to move ahead, including access to the expanded “45Q” tax credits in the United States
(which provide $50 /tCO2 for dedicated storage or $35 /tCO2 for EOR) and to programmes
such as the European Innovation Fund.

IEA. All rights reserved

Selected policy approaches
Support for CCUS following the 2008 global financial crisis was behind the successful
commissioning of several projects in operation today. This includes the world’s first
application of CCUS to bioethanol production at the Illinois Industrial CCUS project, the
Petra Nova coal-fired power plant in Texas, the Quest facility capturing CO2 from hydrogen
production in Canada, and the Alberta Carbon Trunk Line, which began operations in June
2020.

Chapter 2 | Evaluation of possible recovery measures

101

2

CCUS facilities are typically large infrastructure investments with multi-year planning and
construction schedules. Lower cost and less complex industrial CCUS applications, including
retrofits of existing facilities, allow for faster deployment, alongside investment in shared
CO2 transport and storage infrastructure.
Examples of policy measures to support CCUS deployment and innovation include:


Invest in shared CO2 transport and storage infrastructure, for example through publicprivate partnerships or a regulated asset base model, to reduce early integration risks
for CCUS facilities.



Target capital and operational support in the form of grants, tax credits, feed-in-tariffs
or contracts-for-difference for early commercial deployment. These measures could be
complemented by carbon pricing or emissions standards.



Boost public procurement of low-carbon products, including building materials,
chemicals or fuel, to provide a market signal for CCUS investment (including CO2 use).
Such measures would need to be underpinned by rigorous lifecycle analysis and
accounting to verify emissions reductions.



Support RD&D to reduce the cost of capture technologies and to scale-up
demonstration of key applications, including steel and cement production with CCUS.

Economic and other implications
CCUS infrastructure is capital intensive with job creation concentrated in the construction
phase. For example, the CCUS retrofit of the Boundary Dam coal plant in Canada involved
1 700 workers during construction (Townsend, Raji and Zapantis, 2020), while the planned
Norwegian Full-Chain industrial CCS project will create around 4 000 jobs during
development and construction, and around 170 O&M jobs (Northern Lights PCI, 2020).

IEA. All rights reserved

CCUS investment would support job retention in key sectors and regions, including at
existing industrial or power facilities, as well as job creation associated with equipment and
technology production. Many of the job opportunities in CCUS will rely on the subsurface
skills and experience currently available in the oil and gas sector. These include near-term
employment needs associated with CO2 storage exploration, as well the more intensive
phase of characterisation and development of new storage facilities.
CCUS offers a potential economic opportunity for oil- and gas-producing nations to play a
leading role in the technology’s development and deployment. Using CO2 for EOR can boost
oil production from existing assets as well as reduce overall emission intensity and avoid
the need for new production infrastructure. Depleted oil and gas reservoirs also provide
one of the lowest cost CO2 storage options, which could be a valuable resource in a future
where hundreds of millions of tonnes of CO2 will need to be stored. The availability of lowcost natural gas and CO2 storage could also provide a comparative advantage in the
production of clean hydrogen.

102

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Chapter 3
A sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector
S U M M A R Y
• We have designed a global sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector which has
three goals: to maintain and create jobs, boost economic growth, and improve
energy sustainability and resilience. This plan, which is specific, detailed and timelimited, was developed using the quantitative assessments of potential energy
sector measures in Chapter 2. It takes account of the circumstances of individual
countries, as well as existing energy project pipelines and current market conditions.

• We estimate that the overall spending need for the plan is around $1 trillion per
year over the next three years: this represents about 0.7% of global GDP today, and
includes both public spending and private finance that would be mobilised by public
policies. The public spending required would be equivalent to less than 10% of fiscal
expenditure in recovery plans announced to date; after the 2008-09 financial crisis,
green measures accounted for around 16% of total stimulus measures.

• Our modelling indicates that this plan would create nearly 9 million new energyrelated jobs in construction and manufacturing over the next three years: this
compares with a figure of 6 million jobs at risk from the Covid-19 crisis in energy
supply, efficiency and vehicles. There would also be more than 0.5 million
permanent jobs associated with operating and maintaining the assets constructed
by the sustainable recovery plan.

• Analysis done jointly with the International Monetary Fund indicates that this plan
would also increase global GDP by 1.1% in each of the next three years, and would
lead to global GDP being 3.5% higher in 2023 that it would have been without a
spending stimulus.

• A wide range of policies would be required to support the deployment of this plan
with the aim of delivering shovel-ready clean energy projects that boost resilience;
developing a strong pipeline of new projects; tailoring support for distressed
industries; mobilising large levels of private finance; and strengthening international
co-operation.

• Energy systems would become more sustainable as a result of the plan. Globally,
annual energy-related CO2 emissions would be nearly 3.5 Gt lower than they would
have been otherwise, and methane emissions would be cut by 0.8 Gt CO2-eq. Air
pollutant emissions would be around 5% lower. In addition, around 420 million
people would gain access to clean cooking solutions in low-income countries, and
nearly 270 million people would gain access to electricity.

IEA. All rights reserved

• Energy systems would also become more resilient as a result of the plan. Investment
in better electricity grids and improved efficiency would improve electricity security
by lessening the risks of outages, boosting flexibility, reducing losses and helping to
integrate larger shares of variable renewables. Energy consumer bills would also be
lower across all regions, freeing resources for spending in other sectors.
Chapter 3 | A sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector

103

3.1

Introduction

The enormity of the shock caused by the Covid-19 pandemic is prompting governments
around the world to develop economic recovery plans that will shape infrastructure and
industries for decades. There is a very strong case for the energy sector to play a central
part in these plans:


The Covid-19 crisis has highlighted the importance of developing more resilient and
sustainable energy systems that are capable of withstanding future shocks and
improving the health and well-being of citizens; but the disruptions occurring to
energy markets and investment trends has made this more difficult to achieve.



Investment in the energy sector can provide jobs and boost growth, while
strengthening the resilience of energy systems and making energy more affordable,
thereby supporting broad economic activity and jobs in all parts of the economy.
Improved energy sector resilience and reliability would greatly reduce economic losses
and lost labour hours. Investment in energy is also needed to develop more
sustainable systems, speed up clean energy transitions and reduce emissions in pursuit
of the goals of the Paris Agreement and the UN Sustainable Development Agenda.
A rebound in emissions as the global economy emerges from this crisis is very likely
unless action is taken to place clean energy transitions at the heart of economic
recovery.

IEA. All rights reserved

Chapter 2 examined a range of measures, assessing their potential to create jobs and
stimulate growth and their likely impact on energy security, emissions and air pollution.
This chapter sets out a sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector based on these
assessments and on countries’ specific circumstances. It is for governments to make their
own decisions about what measures to adopt and how much to spend, but action on the
basis of the measures in the plan would provide a major boost to the global economy,
create millions of new jobs, and ensure that the recovery yields long-lasting benefits for
energy sustainability and resilience.

3.2

Objectives and design of a sustainable recovery plan
for energy

3.2.1

Goals of a global sustainable recovery plan for energy

In drawing up a sustainable recovery plan for energy, we have focused on three
overarching objectives: to create jobs, to boost economic growth, and to improve resilience
and sustainability. While some measures could contribute to all three objectives, there are
inevitably some trade-offs. Taking into account country-specific circumstances and the
world’s shared goals on sustainability, we have developed a practical, concrete and timelimited global sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector that would collectively deliver
on all three objectives (Figure 3.1).
104

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Figure 3.1 ⊳

Integrated goals of a sustainable recovery plan for the
energy sector

3

The sustainable recovery plan provides an integrated approach to support jobs and
boost the economy while improving the sustainability and resilience of energy sectors.

3.2.2

Sustainable recovery plan measures

Evaluation of measures

IEA. All rights reserved

In evaluating the measures discussed in Chapter 2 in the context of the three objectives of
the sustainable recovery plan, we have considered in particular:


Timeliness: Some measures can provide an immediate boost to jobs, either because
they are relatively small-scale and do not require protracted planning processes or
because they have already gone through these processes (projects of this kind are
often described as “shovel-ready”).



Near-term employment effects: The larger the number of jobs per unit of spending,
the greater the immediate impact on employment and growth. This is assessed in
Table 3.1 on the basis of the jobs multipliers discussed in Chapter 2 that indicate the
number of jobs created per million US dollars of investment or spending.



Provision of jobs for displaced workers: Some measures would create jobs for workers
who were made redundant as a result of the Covid-19 crisis or who work in sectors
where further job losses are likely. Some measures would also provide employment
requiring similar skills to those used in jobs that have disappeared, minimising the
need for retraining.

Chapter 3 | A sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector

105



Long-term benefits: While a focus on near-term factors is central to the sustainable
recovery plan, some measures would support long-term economic growth and
significantly improve energy system resilience and sustainability. This includes, for
example, measures that would expand energy access, reduce energy poverty and
reduce carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions.



Current cost effectiveness of emissions reductions: Some measures provide much
larger emissions reductions per unit of spending than others. This is assessed in
Table 3.1 on the basis of the relative net present value of the costs and savings divided
by the CO2 emissions avoided over the lifetime of each measure.

There are certainly trade-offs between these factors. For example, there are some
measures that would provide very cost-effective emission reductions but would not
provide a major boost to jobs (Figure 3.2). Table 3.1 provides an overall assessment of how
the measures compare. It is important to note, however, that the assessment of measures
may vary from one country to another. For example, new gas-fired power capacity might
lead to emission reductions in countries where it replaces coal, but might “lock-in” a higher
level of emissions in countries that do not currently rely heavily on coal-fired power plants.
Figure 3.2 ⊳

Global average jobs created and cost effectiveness of emissions
reductions for selected energy sector measures

Dollars per tCO₂

40

Nuclear lifetime extension

20

Industry efficiency

10
0

Solar PV

Onshore and offshore wind

30

Reduce oil and gas methane emissions
Hydro lifetime extension

Appliance efficiency

- 10

New electric cars

- 20
- 30
Building efficiency

- 40
New efficient cars
- 50
0

IEA. All rights reserved

Electricity

5
Buildings

10
Transport

15
Jobs per million dollars

Industry

Fuels

Efficiency measures create a large number of jobs per unit of investment and many
have negative abatement costs, yet there are trade-offs for some other measures.
Note: tCO2 = tonnes of carbon dioxide; PV = photovoltaic.

106

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Table 3.1 ⊳

Assessment of measures for the sustainable recovery plan
Creates jobs
Boosts the economy
Improves energy
sustainability and resilience

Timeliness

Near-term
employment
effects*

Provision
of jobs for
displaced
workers

Long-term
benefits

Current cost
effectiveness
of emissions
reductions*

Electricity
Expand and modernise grids
Wind and solar PV
Lifetime extensions of
nuclear and hydro power
New unabated gas
New unabated coal
Transport
New electric and high
efficiency cars
High-speed rail
Urban infrastructure
Buildings
Retrofits and more efficient
new buildings
Appliance efficiency
Clean cooking
Fuels
Reduce methane from oil and
gas operations
Reform inefficient fossil fuel
subsidies
Biofuels
Industry
Efficiency
Material efficiency
Innovation
Hydrogen
Batteries
CCUS
SMRs

IEA. All rights reserved

Good match

Neutral match

Poor match

*Based on relative levels of jobs created per unit of spending and dollars per tCO2-eq avoided.
Notes: PV = photovoltaic; CCUS = carbon capture, utilisation and storage; SMRs = small modular nuclear
reactors, tCO2-eq = tonnes of carbon-dioxide equivalent. Suitability of the various measures will vary across
different regions; levels shown provide a global perspective.

Chapter 3 | A sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector

107

3

Spending on measures
The spending associated with this plan is around $1 trillion for each of the next three years
(i.e. from 2021 to 2023). This amounts to around 0.7% of global gross domestic product
(GDP) in each year. This figure is based on the difference between spending on clean
energy technologies in recent years and the spending needed to deliver the measures in
the plan, taking account of current project pipelines, market conditions and the varying
circumstances of countries. This spending would be additional to the annual levels of
expenditure on clean energy measures that have occurred in recent years and includes
both public spending and private finance that would be mobilised by public policies
(section 3.2.3).
The plan envisages expenditure across six sectors:

IEA. All rights reserved

Electricity measures would cover:


Support for electricity networks to strengthen resilience. They would help operators
integrate higher shares of variable renewables and could lead to a long-term reduction
in consumer bills. In developing economies, investment in grids and off-grid solutions
would increase network reliability, reduce electricity losses and bring access to people
who currently lack it. Nearly $110 billion would be spent in each of the three years on
grid infrastructure and for investment in smart grids, the majority of which is spent on
upgrades, modernisation and refurbishment.



Accelerated wind and solar PV deployment. These are two of the power technologies
that most merit government support in many countries, given their short construction
times, declining costs, and, for solar PV, the large numbers of jobs it can create.
Around $180 billion would be spent each year globally on new wind and solar PV
projects and projects to repower existing sites.



Modernising and upgrading existing nuclear and hydropower plants in countries
where licensing and approvals processes are in place. In countries where site
permitting is already well advanced, new hydro and nuclear power plants would bring
jobs and reduce emissions from power generation if displacing fossil fuel plants.
Around $20 billion would be spent each year to support continued generation from
existing and new hydroelectricity power plants. Around $15 billion would be spent
each year to support lifetime extensions of existing plants and build new nuclear
power plants.

Buildings measures can quickly create a large number of new local jobs, often with low or
negative CO2 abatement costs. They can help to ensure that new buildings are constructed
as efficiently as possible, and that existing buildings are made more efficient by insulating,
air sealing, replacing inefficient appliances and installing heat pumps and renewable energy
systems that use solar water heaters and biomass boilers. Around $250 billion would be
spent on buildings measures each year (Figure 3.3).

108

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Figure 3.3 ⊳

Average annual spending by sector and measure (billion dollars)
Wind and solar PV
Networks
Nuclear and hydro
Buildings efficiency
End-use renewables
Appliances
Clean cooking

3

New electric vehicles
Long-distance transport
New efficient cars
Urban infrastructure
Industry energy efficiency
Material efficiency
Biofuels
Methane reductions
Batteries, hydrogen, CCUS and SMRs
50
Electricity

Buildings

Transport

100
Industry

150

200

Billion dollars (2019)
Fuels
Innovation

Nearly $1 trillion would be spent annually on clean, modern energy technologies
for the next three years as part of the sustainable recovery plan.
Note: CCUS = carbon capture, utilisation and storage; SMRs = small modular nuclear reactors.

The transport sector was severely affected by the Covid-19 lockdowns across most
countries. Governments could support jobs while also reshaping transport systems to be
more modern and resilient while reducing air pollution and greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions. Around $150 billion would be spent each year on purchases of more efficient
cars and electric vehicles (including electric cars, two/three wheelers, buses and light
commercial vehicles). 1 Nearly $90 billion would be spent each year on long-distance
transport to boost high-speed rail and to improve the efficiency of trucks, airplanes and
ships. A further $30 billion would be spent each year to accelerate deployment of
recharging networks for electric vehicles, upgrade public transport, and improve walking
and cycling infrastructure.

IEA. All rights reserved

Industry measures offer considerable scope to improve efficiency, and by doing so to
improve resilience and reduce emissions. Around $70 billion would be spent each year to
improve the efficiency of existing industrial facilities through the deployment of improved
electric motors, heat pumps and agricultural irrigation pumps, and wider implementation
1 Incentives for efficient and electric cars would likely encourage some consumers to change planned car
purchases and some consumers to make new car purchases. In the former case, only the additional cost of
the more efficient or electric car (compared with an inefficient equivalent) is included in the spending, in the
latter case the full cost of the new car is included.

Chapter 3 | A sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector

109

of energy management systems. An additional $10 billion would be spent each year to
improve waste management and material efficiency.
Measures for fuels would cover:


Support for biofuel industries if they meet appropriate sustainability criteria. Biofuel
industries are important employers of both low and high skilled workers in many
countries that have been severely impacted by the slowdown in demand for liquid
fuels. Around $20 billion would be spent on biofuels in each year of the sustainable
recovery plan.



Support for the upstream oil and gas sector could be focused on reducing methane
emissions. This would provide a new source of employment for oil and gas workers
made redundant by the crisis and would be a cost-efficient way to bring about an
immediate reduction in GHG emissions. Any wider support for the upstream sector
would need to take into account the investment levels needed to meet future oil and
gas demand.

Support for innovation and the development of new technologies is unlikely to create a
large increase in jobs or economic activity in the short term. In the longer term, however,
targeted support to develop and deploy emerging clean energy technologies and boost the
skills base of domestic workers could bring important benefits in terms of sustainability and
resilience. It could also lead to the development of new industries. The current low cost of
capital adds force to the case for supporting research and development, providing market
incentives, promoting commercial demonstration plants and encouraging the scaling up of
manufacturing capacity. Around $45 billion would be spent each year to accelerate the
development and production of new projects and industrial capacity for clean energy
technologies such as hydrogen, batteries, carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS)
and small modular nuclear reactors (SMRs).

IEA. All rights reserved

Some important cross-cutting points:


Energy efficiency measures score highly in terms of effectiveness across the transport,
industry and buildings sectors, and feature strongly in the plan. They improve selfsufficiency, reduce exposure to extended supply chains and reduce potential impacts
of volatile commodity prices, while providing an immediate boost to local jobs. In total,
one-third of the $1 trillion annual spending would be devoted to efficiency measures.



For low-income countries, it is critical to accelerate efforts to provide universal access
to electricity and clean cooking solutions. This would provide an immediate increase
in local jobs and durable improvements to social well-being by modernising health
services and food value chains: it would also support economic and social resilience.
Around $45 billion would be spent each year improving access to electricity for people
in low-income countries, (which is included in the spending levels discussed for the
electricity sector). An additional $5 billion would be spent each year to ensure and
improve access to clean cooking solutions.

110

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report



The significant decline in fossil fuel prices presents an opportunity to further the
process of reforming inefficient fossil fuel subsidies without increasing end-use prices.
In producer economies, fiscal positions are under a great deal of strain given increases
in spending to deal with the health and economic crises, as well as the contraction in
oil and gas revenues. Cutting expenditure on fossil fuel subsidies could help alleviate
some of this stress.

3.2.3

Policies to support the sustainable recovery plan

The sustainable recovery plan rests on five key policy pillars (Figure 3.4). Of course, the
specific policies adopted will vary from country to country depending on their particular
circumstances and needs. Examples of specific policies that could be adopted under each of
the pillars are provided in Table 3.2.

IEA. All rights reserved

Figure 3.4 ⊳

The five policy pillars that support the implementation of the
sustainable recovery plan

Deliver shovel-ready clean energy projects that boost resilience. A number of projects
that were under construction or had reached the advanced stages of planning were
delayed or postponed as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic. Restarting and supporting
these projects – while ensuring the health of workers – could provide an immediate boost
in employment and economic output. However it is important that these projects are
compatible with long-term energy security and environmental objectives.
Develop a strong pipeline of new projects. Developing a more modern and resilient energy
system requires investment in longer term infrastructure and energy efficiency projects. A
Chapter 3 | A sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector

111

3

pipeline of such projects would help to maintain steady investment activity and create jobs.
Alongside direct government expenditure, consideration could be given to supporting the
development of a pipeline of projects by modifying incentive structures and streamlining
planning laws and procedures, which could make investment in such projects more
attractive to private finance.
Tailor support for distressed industries. Some sectors severely impacted by the Covid-19
crisis are likely to require government support to continue operations. A number of
countries have announced support packages for their construction, vehicle manufacturing
and airline industries, for example. Governments could make support for these industries
conditional on progress towards long-term sustainability and resilience.
Mobilise private finance. Some of the spending on energy projects will need to be
undertaken directly by governments. However, it is essential that public policies mobilise
private spending on measures that are aligned with the goals of the sustainable recovery
plan. In some cases, it may be possible to use direct government expenditure to underpin
measures such as improving effective regulatory procedures, reforming energy taxes,
setting or raising actual or effective carbon prices, and reducing risks for private
investment.
International co-operation. There would be significant co-ordination gains if countries align
their actions. For example, if a group of countries deploy a particular clean energy
technology, its costs are likely to fall faster than if only one country deploys it, to the
benefit of all. Cross-border collaboration could also be useful in helping to re-establish
some international supply chains disrupted by the Covid-19 crisis.

Mobilising investment
Part of the sustainable recovery plan will need to be funded through direct government
expenditure. One of the five key policy pillars of the sustainable recovery plan is the
mobilisation of private financing to complement the direct government expenditure. Public
policies have an essential part to play in facilitating the deployment of private capital
through regulations, market frameworks and tax reforms (Table 3.2).

IEA. All rights reserved

Private investment needs to be aligned with the goals of sustainability and resilience, and
this could be facilitated by integrating sustainability risk considerations within financial
regulatory frameworks and introducing or raising carbon prices, so as to direct private
capital towards low-carbon options. There are increasing amounts of data available to
allow markets to assess sustainability risks (TCFD, 2017), as well as measures that allow
markets to recognise and reward sustainable investments (European Commission, 2020).
Where central banks are expanding the supply of money through the purchase of assets,
the introduction of appropriate eligibility criteria (for example, a preference to purchase
corporate bonds that meet certain conditions), would help to ensure that the finance is
directed towards sectors and technologies that are aligned with the goals of the sustainable
recovery plan (Matikainen, Campiglio and Zenghelis, 2017).
112

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Table 3.2 ⊳

Selected policies that could be implemented alongside financial
support as part of the sustainable recovery plan

Pillar

Examples of policies

Deliver shovel-ready
clean energy projects
that boost resilience

• Undertake deep retrofits of government-owned buildings.
• Ease regulatory approval procedures and extend tax credits schemes for
electricity from renewables and other clean energy projects.
• Promote the use of energy management systems in light and heavy industries.

Develop a strong
pipeline of new
projects

• Provide a long-term vision on sustainability and resilience to guide investment
decisions.
• Increase borrowing thresholds and provide tax credits or grants for new
infrastructure such as electricity networks.
• Promote auctions, grants and rebates that seek to improve the energy
efficiency of new and existing buildings.
• Strengthen minimum energy performance standards for appliances supported
by mandatory labelling and targeted rebates.
• Support the development of urban and public transport infrastructure such as
high-speed rail and charging points for electric vehicles.

Tailor support for
distressed industries

• Strengthen and widen energy efficiency goals and promote the use of zerocarbon fuels in car manufacturing industries.
• Accelerate renovation and construction activity by introducing or
strengthening requirements for highly efficient or near-zero energy buildings.
• Introduce or strengthen rules on measuring and reducing methane emissions
from oil and gas operations.

Mobilise private
finance

• Establish public co-funding schemes to reduce upfront investment costs
through grants, concessional loans, public procurement and feed-in-tariffs.
• Provide more long-term contracts and regulatory investment guarantees.
• Provide insurance policies and guarantees to reduce the cost of capital.
• Provide technical assistance and capacity building.
• Strengthen international finance institutions sustainable development lending
criteria.
• Introduce or raise actual or effective carbon prices.

IEA. All rights reserved

International
co-operation

• Accelerate the re-establishment of disrupted energy supply chains.
• Co-operate on cross-border energy efficiency standards to expand the market
size for more efficient goods and technologies.
• For internationally traded goods and technologies, promote the alignment of
measures to support production with measures to stimulate demand.
• Advance cross-border transport links and establish infrastructure that
provides hubs for alternative fuels for international travel and transport.

Within the sustainable recovery plan, direct government investment focusses mainly on
areas where private investment is difficult to mobilise or where the levels of private
investment seem likely to fall short of what is needed. The need for such investment should
be carefully assessed; it should last only as long as necessary and it should be undertaken
with a view to facilitate private finance where appropriate. The scale of the needed
investment for the plan means that in practice most of it is going to have to come from the
private sector. That portion to be funded by government will vary from country to country.
Chapter 3 | A sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector

113

3

There is, for example, likely to be a greater need for public financing in some developing
economies, where state-owned enterprises tend to play a bigger role in overall energy
spending than in advanced economies, especially in electricity generation and networks.
Globally, the sustainable recovery plan requires just under $300 billion of government
spending each year over the period to 2023 (Figure 3.5). This direct expenditure, together
with enabling policies, mobilises private spending of close to $700 billion. 2
Figure 3.5 ⊳
100%

90

Annual public and private spending in the sustainable
recovery plan, 2021-2023
120

30

150

30

240

140

50

120

30 Billion dollars
Private

80%

Public

60%
40%

Advanced economies

Other

Transport

Industry

Buildings

Electricity

Other

Transport

Industry

Buildings

Electricity

20%

Rest of world

Around 70% of the $1 trillion annual spending comes from private sources, with direct
financial public support and policy design critical to mobilising these funds.

Total government spending over the three years of the plan ($870 billion) would be
equivalent to less than 10% of estimated fiscal expenditure in recovery plans that have
been announced globally as of the end of May 2020 (Battersby, Lam and Ture, 2020). After
the 2008-09 financial crisis, spending on clean energy technology and environmental
management measures accounted for around 16% of total stimulus measures (as discussed
in Chapter 1).

3.2.4

Recovery plans in developing economies

IEA. All rights reserved

Many developing economies are at particular risk from the Covid-19 crisis. In terms of
immediate health, unemployment and humanitarian implications, they often have
inadequate healthcare capacity and weak social safety nets relative to some advanced
economies. Many could also face particularly severe economic difficulties because of high
2 The public to private split is broadly based on historical investment ratios between state-owned enterprises
and private firms across the various measures, with differing values for advanced economies and the rest of
the world, but with allowance for the higher level of government support that may be needed in some
sectors (such as transport). This may underestimate the level of public spending since the economic
downturn may reduce the relative willingness or ability of private firms to invest at historical levels.

114

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

existing levels of public sector debt and high levels of informal or insecure jobs; in some
cases these difficulties may be compounded by weakness in their institutions. Some rely on
income from oil and gas exports and have seen a major drop in revenues. Many are
boosted by remittances and direct aid from advanced economies that could be at risk
because of the economic slowdown. For example, it is estimated that remittances in 2020
going to countries in sub-Saharan Africa could fall by almost 25% from 2019 levels, while
remittances to countries in Latin America could fall by 19% (Ratha et al., 2020).
Many people in developing economies still lack access to modern energy and clean cooking.
Globally, 860 million people did not have access to electricity in 2018, and around 60% of
health services lack reliable access to electricity in most sub-Saharan countries
(Cronk and Bartram, 2018). More than 2.6 billion people also relied on traditional uses of
biomass, coal or kerosene as their primary cooking fuel in 2018. Household air pollution
causes around 2.5 million premature deaths every year; progress on clean cooking would
substantially reduce this. Innovative and more decentralised energy systems, making full
use of local agricultural and energy resources (including modern bioenergy, such as biogas
or bio-ethanol and solar PV), have an important part to play in improving access to
electricity and progress on clean cooking. Modest levels of investment in these areas can
often generate large social and environmental improvements, while at the same time
boosting energy resilience and facilitating economic growth.

IEA. All rights reserved

Accessing private financing could be a challenge for some countries considering sustainable
recovery plans. There has been a major increase in capital outflows away from developing
economies since the start of the Covid-19 crisis, and many countries have limited monetary
policy options at their disposal. Not all countries have access to international capital
markets, and those that do are facing higher financing costs because of increased sovereign
risks (Spiegel, Schwank and Obaidy, 2020). International co-operation to mobilise
concessional loans and provide debt restructuring or debt relief therefore will be critical
(UN DESA, 2020). 3
International finance institutions (IFIs), multilateral development banks (MDBs), and
bilateral donors (e.g. the G20 countries) will have an important role to play in underpinning
the sustainable recovery plan measures in some countries. They have provided emergency
financial assistance and debt relief to a number of low-income countries during the
unfolding of the pandemic. IFIs and MDBs have also been among the largest foreign direct
investors in clean energy technologies in developing countries in recent years, offering
short-term credit or guarantees (to improve risk-adjusted returns for private investors),
helping to remove barriers to investment and providing technical assistance. Many IFIs and
MDBs have announced financing goals or are refining frameworks to improve the
alignment of their lending portfolios with sustainability objectives (for example, to limit or
discourage emission-intensive technologies and infrastructure, and more broadly to
integrate adaptation measures into project designs). This should help to boost the
3 Concessional loans have more generous terms than market loans, for example through lower interest rates

or longer grace periods than those available on the market.

Chapter 3 | A sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector

115

3

development of new low emission and resilient infrastructure projects, attract private
investors, expand markets, and support governments in reforming climate and investment
policies (OECD/The World Bank/UN Environment, 2018).
Domestic policy frameworks and market designs play a key role in attracting private
finance. Markets dominated by monopolies and state-owned enterprises are often less
attractive to foreign investors. For example, in sub-Saharan African countries (excluding
South Africa), every $1 of public funding in power generation attracted around $0.6 of
private capital in recent years, much lower than the levels for South Africa ($4.5) and
countries in Southeast Asia ($3.5). Governments can improve the prospects for mobilising
private financing with targeted interventions to support risk sharing, liquidity support and
take-out financing.
Recovery plans also need to take into account countries’ individual macroeconomic
characteristics such as the size and robustness of supply chains, the degree of economic
diversification and the extent of labour market flexibility. Governments with restricted
fiscal space may want to pay special attention to mobilising private finance and focus on
ensuring the delivery of shovel-ready clean energy projects. For maximum impact, projects
should be carefully selected and appraised, backed by precise cost-benefit analysis and
channelled through or overseen by adequately resourced public institutions, with a high
degree of transparency throughout. Targeted engagement with the private sector and civil
society can help improve transparency. An approach of this kind would also help to avoid
the creation of asset bubbles.

3.3

Implications of the sustainable recovery plan

3.3.1

The economy

We estimate that this sustainable recovery plan would create nearly 9 million new energyrelated jobs in construction and manufacturing on average over the next three years, and
that there would be an additional 0.4 million job-years in later years from continued work
on assets with long construction periods. In total, the plan would therefore directly
produce around 27 million job-years worldwide. 4 There would also be more than
0.5 million permanent jobs associated with operating and maintaining the assets
constructed by the sustainable recovery plan.
We look first at the temporary construction and manufacturing jobs that would be created
and then at the longer term operations, maintenance and management jobs.

IEA. All rights reserved

Construction and manufacturing job creation
The near-term focus of the sustainable recovery plan is to stabilise existing projects to
maintain jobs and to launch new projects with very short lead times to jump-start new
employment. For example, energy efficiency retrofits can often be ramped up quickly, as
4 For information on the definitions for the jobs analysis conducted for this report and its methodology,
please refer to Annex A.

116

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

can projects to install or improve urban transport infrastructure. New projects of this kind
would provide some immediate opportunities for those who have lost or stand to lose jobs
in construction and manufacturing because of the pandemic and its fallout.
If the sustainable recovery plan were to be implemented by all countries globally, this
would lead to the creation of around 9 million full-time equivalent energy sector jobs in
construction and manufacturing by the end of 2021 (Figure 3.6). Construction and
manufacturing jobs only last as long as there is a steady stream of new projects, and at
some point countries would need to assess the need to repopulate the project pipeline to
sustain these jobs. The plan runs from 2021 to 2023, but countries could decide to maintain
support for particular measures or to incentivise new activities beyond the three-year
period considered here. Ideally those working on energy efficiency, for example, would
return to a revived retrofit and construction economy or retrain for other fields. There
would also be a small number of construction and manufacturing jobs that would last
beyond the brief recovery plan period, largely from long-lead time and slow-to-build
infrastructure projects in the power sector.

Million jobs

Figure 3.6 ⊳

Construction and manufacturing jobs created in the sustainable
recovery plan by sector, 2021-2023

10

Innovation
Fuels

8

Industry
6

Transport
Buildings

4

Electricity
2
0

2021

2022

2023

A large number of jobs are created during the period of recovery plan spending; many
also continue thereafter, especially in long-distance transport and electricity networks.

IEA. All rights reserved

Note: Takes into account the sequencing, planning and approval status of measures across countries, the
types of jobs required for the various measures, and construction and manufacturing times.

Of the 27 million job-years created worldwide by the sustainable recovery plan, 35% are in
energy efficiency projects in the buildings and industry sectors, and just over 25% are in the
electricity sector. Jobs related to cars account for over 10%, and those arising from other
transport measures are also about 10%. The remaining jobs are spread across fuels,
renewables in end-uses, recycling and innovation (Figure 3.7).
Of the 9.5 million total job-years for energy efficiency in buildings and industry, just under
60% are for buildings retrofits and efficient new construction. Most regions have a
Chapter 3 | A sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector

117

3

domestic supply chain to support construction material production and implementation,
and so most of these jobs would be created within the regions where the investment takes
place. Many efficiency measures would lead to consumer savings, often within a short
period of time; they would also provide immediate improvements in the resilience of
energy systems. In the power sector, 60% of the 7 million total job-years created would be
in renewables. While the construction jobs for these investments would be created locally,
some of the manufacturing jobs, which make up around 20% of the total job-years created,
would be created outside the region making the investment.
Annual
average
constructing
manufacturing
jobs created in
Figure 3.7 ⊳ Annual
average
jobs
created in and
constructing
and manufacturing
the sustainable recovery plan

Wind and solar PV
Networks
Nuclear and hydro
Buildings efficiency
End-use renewables
Appliances
Clean cooking
New electric vehicles
Long-distance transport
New efficient cars
Urban infrastructure
Industry energy efficiency
Material efficiency
Biofuels
Methane reductions
Batteries, hydrogen, CCUS and SMRs
0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

Million jobs
Electricity

Buildings

Transport

Industry

Fuels

Innovation

IEA. All rights reserved

Nearly 9 million new jobs would be created on average each year by the sustainable
recovery plan; around 35% of these jobs would be in the buildings sector.

The drop in coal demand is expected to decrease employment in coal-based electricity
generation by 0.2 million by 2021. To reduce the social impact of these job losses, wellresourced retraining, capacity building and regional revitalisation programmes will be
required to enable workers and communities to find attractive alternative livelihoods.
The economic impact of Covid-19 is likely to be felt most profoundly by the poor and
economically vulnerable segments of society. Around 5% of the jobs created by the
118

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

sustainable recovery plan would be suitable for unskilled labour: a number of measures,
like waste collection and biofuels support, would also be likely to support a significant
number of workers in the informal economy. In low-income countries without full
electricity access where many people rely on the traditional use of biomass for cooking,
investment in grids, decentralised systems and clean cooking solutions could employ
around 350 000 people globally on average in the period to 2023.
Many of the jobs created by the sustainable recovery plan would match the skills of
workers who lost jobs during the crisis, or would require little retraining. For example,
former manufacturing workers could work on assembling highly efficient commercial
durable goods, and former construction workers could undertake building retrofits.
However, we estimate that around 40% of the jobs created globally in the sustainable
recovery plan would be in specialised positions, which would require substantial retraining
programmes. For example, a large portion of the work on large civil construction projects
(such as hydro or nuclear power) is highly technical. While workers may be available from
overseas to fill immediate skills gaps, investment in retraining and capacity building would
be essential to supply this segment of the labour market.
Some measures in the sustainable recovery plan would stimulate demand for imports of
goods and services. Suppliers for high-tech goods and services (for example relating to
power networks and high-speed rail) are often located in advanced economies, while basic
fabrication materials and appliances are often manufactured outside of advanced
economies. Countries could aim to maintain or develop a higher proportion of jobs by
promoting local industries and developing domestic supply chains, although this would
need to be balanced against the need to ensure competitiveness. International
co-operation and trade agreements could help reduce potential areas of conflict.
Globally, males hold around 93% of construction jobs and more than 60% of manufacturing
jobs. Unless gender occupational segregation is addressed, the jobs created by sustainable
recovery plans are likely to be taken mainly by men. A multi-track approach is needed to
close gender gaps and achieve equality in employment and remuneration (ILO, 2019).
Rights at work should ensure that women and men have equal opportunities, are protected
from discrimination and have access to maternity and parental leave allowances. Child-care
policies, support for lifelong learning, an enabling environment for female entrepreneurs
and social dialogue would also contribute to empowering women in the labour market.

IEA. All rights reserved

Operations, maintenance and management job creation
Construction and manufacturing would account for the vast majority of the immediate jobs
boost during the sustainable recovery plan, but long-lived capital assets built as a result of
the plan would also give rise to continuing operation and maintenance (O&M) and
management jobs. A much smaller number of these jobs would be created, but they would
last for a much longer period. We estimate that nearly 0.5 million O&M and management
jobs would be created by the measures realised in the sustainable recovery plan. The cost

Chapter 3 | A sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector

119

3

of sustaining these jobs is not included in the sustainable recovery plan: they would be
funded from the operating revenues of firms using the assets developed under the plan.
The sustainable recovery plan would provide further long-term employment by “inducing”
further jobs across the economy: spending by those in new jobs would lead to further job
creation in other sectors. Many energy measures – in particular energy efficiency – would
deliver savings for consumers and so increase household disposable income for other
purposes, thereby supporting employment in other economic activities. Investment in new
industries, such battery manufacturing and hydrogen production, could also provide an
important runway for future job growth.

Economic growth
A critical aim of the sustainable recovery plan is to provide a boost to the global economy.
The impacts of the sustainable recovery plan on global GDP have been estimated by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) using the Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal (GIMF)
model. 5 The GIMF provides an estimate of the response in GDP over time across different
regions to a surge in spending that is above the past five-year average levels of investment.
The estimate assumes that monetary authorities do not raise nominal interest rates in
response to the increases in activity and inflation resulting from the recovery plan: this
provides additional impetus to activity by reducing real interest rates (Table 3.3). The
estimate isolates the specific impacts of the sustainable recovery plan by comparing its
results against a baseline that assumes no other increase in investment.
Table 3.3 ⊳

Impact of the sustainable recovery plan on selected global
macroeconomic indicators
2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

Inflation

0.3

0.7

1.3

1.7

1.9

Real interest rate

-0.5

-0.9

-1.4

-1.7

-1.8

Consumption

1.4

2.7

3.9

4.6

5.0

Notes: Inflation and real interest rate are percentage point differences from a baseline with no increase in
investment. Inflation is the change in consumer price index; all other values are in real terms. Consumption
is the percentage increase in aggregate spending by households and firms.

IEA. All rights reserved

The sustainable recovery plan – with $1 trillion dollars of annual spending through 2023 – is
estimated to lead to a 3.5% increase in real global GDP in 2023 above the level that it would
have been without the spending (Figure 3.8). In terms of annual changes in GDP, this means
that global economic growth each year to 2023 would be 1.1% higher on average than it
would have been otherwise.

5 GIMF is a multi-country dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model used by the IMF for policy and risk

analysis (Laxton et al., 2010; Anderson et al., 2013). It has been used to produce the IMF’s World Economic
Outlook scenario analyses since 2008.

120

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

After the period of growth to 2023, the boost to the level of the global economy is
maintained, despite the end of the spending and a tightening in the accommodative fiscal
stance. 6 This is because, in addition to the direct increase in GDP from the public and
private spending in the energy sector, there are a number of other benefits that help
amplify the boost to GDP. Investment in new infrastructure such as electricity networks and
in energy efficiency increases the overall productivity of both workers and capital. This
generates savings for households, firms and governments which can be reinvested.
Improvements in health from reductions in air pollution and increases in the level of energy
access in low-income countries also lead to additional medium- and long-term economic
growth.
Figure 3.8 ⊳

Increase in real GDP as a result of the sustainable recovery plan

4%

Rest of world
3%
Global average
2%
Advanced economies
1%

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

Global GDP would be 3.5% higher as a result of the sustainable recovery plan.
Note: Shows the increase in GDP in each year relative to a baseline that has no increase in investment; it
takes the average of different methods to recuperate direct government expenditures.
Source: IEA analysis based on the IMF GIMF model.

IEA. All rights reserved

The increase in GDP growth is less in advanced economies than in the rest of the world.
This is partly because the amount of spending in advanced economies is less, but also
because many of the indirect manufacturing jobs created are located outside of advanced
economies. Many countries therefore benefit both from domestic recovery plan spending
and (through exports) from the spending in advanced economies. A further point is that
investment in energy supply infrastructure in advanced economies tends to be less labour
intensive and to provide a less of a boost to productivity than is the case elsewhere.

6 There is a small degree of variation in the increase in global GDP in later years depending on how the near-

term increase in government expenditure is assumed to be funded (e.g. through an increase in taxes or
reduction in government consumption).

Chapter 3 | A sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector

121

3

3.3.2

The energy sector

IEA. All rights reserved

The sustainable recovery plan would begin the process of structurally reorienting countries’
energy sectors by accelerating the shift towards electricity and increasing the share of
energy supplied by low-carbon energy sources (Figure 3.9). If all countries were to follow
the proposals set out in the sustainable recovery plan:


An average of around 130 gigawatts (GW) of additional wind and solar PV global
capacity would be installed each year from 2021 to 2023 (additional to the levels that
would be installed in the absence of the recovery plan). This additional capacity would
generate nearly 320 terawatt-hours (TWh) of electricity on average each year. This
would be underpinned by widespread grid extensions and improvements, including
smart grids and energy storage. The $110 billion spending on grids in the sustainable
recovery plan would increase total spending on grids globally by around 40% from
levels seen in recent years, boosting investment towards the levels needed for a more
resilient and sustainable electricity network.



Just over 30 GW of hydro and nuclear power capacity would benefit from lifetime
extensions each year to 2023. This enables 90 GW of hydro and nuclear capacity that
would otherwise have been soon retired to continue to provide low-carbon power well
beyond the end of the recovery plan.



Final energy consumption would be around 350 million tonnes of oil equivalent (Mtoe)
lower than it would have been otherwise by the end of the spending period. Around
one-third of this would be because of reductions in the traditional use of biomass as a
result of shifts to clean cooking solutions.



Global electricity demand would rise in the period of the recovery plan, but the
increase would be around 900 TWh (75 Mtoe) lower than it would otherwise have
been. There would be deep retrofits of a large number of existing buildings, and a
number of new highly efficient buildings would be built. In total, the efficiency of
around 20 million dwellings would be drastically improved each year as a result of the
recovery plan. A number of end-uses in buildings could switch to renewable sources,
such as solar water heaters and biomass boilers, to reduce fossil fuel and electricity
use. Incentives in the recovery plan would stimulate the purchase of more than
350 million high efficiency appliances each year. A variety of efficiency improvements
in industrial processes would curb electricity use.



Oil consumption in transport would be around 2 million barrels per day (mb/d)
(100 Mtoe) less. Around 12 million car purchases on average each year would be
purchases of more efficient internal combustion engine vehicles (ICEs) (including
hybrids), while around 6.5 million car purchases would be electric vehicles. Total
annual average electric cars sales between 2021 and 2023 would be around 8 million.
Oil demand in transport would also be reduced from a shift in some light commercial
vehicles sales to electric models and from improvements in the efficiency of trucks,
airplanes and ships.

122

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Additional average annual deployment or maintenance of

Figure 3.9 ⊳

selected technologies as a result of the sustainable recovery
plan, 2021-2023
Power

Nuclear
Hydro
Wind and solar PV

3
30

60

90

180
GW

120

150

8

10
12
Million vehicles

240

300
360
Million units

Transport
EVs
Efficient ICEs
2

4

6
Buildings

Appliances
Dwellings
60

120

180

The sustainable recovery plan boosts clean energy technologies in all sectors and regions.
Notes: EVs = electric vehicles; ICEs = internal combustion engines. Indicates additional levels from the
sustainable recovery plan compared to a case with no increase in energy sector spending for: wind and solar
PV power capacity installed; life extensions of hydro and nuclear power plants; changes in types of vehicles
sold; high efficiency dwellings built or retrofit of existing buildings; and energy-efficient appliances sold.

3.3.3

The environment

IEA. All rights reserved

The sustainable recovery plan would have a marked impact on GHG emissions. Emissions
would be nearly 3.5 gigatonnes of CO2 (Gt CO2) lower by 2025 than they would have been
without the recovery plan (Figure 3.10). It is estimated that CO2 emissions in 2020 will be
around 2.6 Gt lower than they otherwise would have been as a result of the slowdown in
activity and the contraction in the global economy related to Covid-19. The emissions
reductions from the three years of the sustainable recovery plan would therefore provide a
much higher level of CO2 emissions reductions than was caused by the Covid-19 crisis, but
achieve this through structural changes in the way that society produces and consumes
energy rather than by curtailing economic activity.
The sustainable recovery plan would kick-start the reductions needed to achieve the goals
of the Paris Agreement. Nonetheless, in isolation, the recovery plan would not be
sufficient; further actions would be needed to put the world on course to achieve the Paris
Agreement goals.
Chapter 3 | A sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector

123

Figure 3.10 ⊳ Emissions avoided as a result of the sustainable recovery plan
Dollars per tCO₂

75

Electricity
Buildings

50

Transport

25

Industry
Fuels

0
-25
-50
0

500

1 000

1 500

2 000

2 500

3 000
Mt CO₂

Annual CO2 emissions would be nearly 3.5 Gt lower and many measures would save
money; a further 0.8 Gt CO2-eq would be avoided by reducing methane leaks.
Note: Mt CO2 = million tonnes of CO2; CO2-eq = carbon-dioxide equivalent (using 100-year global warming
potentials for different greenhouse gases).

IEA. All rights reserved

Energy efficiency measures deliver the largest overall reductions in emissions. Historical
patterns show that efficiency measures have not attracted as much attention as they
deserve; the unique set of circumstances created by Covid-19 mean that this could be an
opportunity for their potential to be seized. Around one-third of the CO2 emissions
reductions that would occur as a result of the sustainable recovery plan have negative
abatement costs, meaning they would save emissions while also saving money. Most of the
elements with negative abatement costs are efficiency measures in the industrial, buildings
and transport sectors. While initial investment from the recovery plan is needed to
stimulate action, the savings from the projects would accrue to firms and households,
reducing short-term risks of energy insufficiency and income stress, and would eventually
be reinvested to stimulate further economic activity and induce further job growth.
In addition to the reductions in energy-related CO2 emissions, investment in tackling
methane leaks from oil and gas operations would yield immediate results by curtailing
around 0.8 Gt CO2-eq emissions (assuming that one tonne of methane is equivalent to
30 tonnes of CO2). Unlike many of the other emission abatement opportunities, the
spending on methane emissions reductions must be sustained each year to maintain the
emissions reduction. For example, leak detection and repair (LDAR) is a cost-effective way
to avoid fugitive methane emission. However, if LDAR programmes stop, new leaks that
could occur would not be found and fugitive emissions would rise again. There would also
be a small drop in methane emissions from replacing the traditional use of solid biomass in
households with alternative fuel sources like liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) or with more
modern cook stoves.
124

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

For countries that currently subsidise the use of fossil fuels, strengthening reform efforts
could curb fossil fuel consumption and thus reduce GHG emissions. As discussed in
Chapter 2, phasing out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies in nearly all regions would reduce CO2
emissions by around 700 million tonnes (Mt) by 2030. To date, there are few signs that the
fall in oil and gas prices is prompting an acceleration in efforts to phase out subsidies. In
fact, some countries have introduced additional price interventions to protect newly
vulnerable consumers, particularly in the electricity sector (IEA, 2020). Turning this around
and strengthening a process of reform would provide an additional boost to emissions
reductions from the sustainable recovery plan.
Figure 3.11 ⊳ Reductions in SOX, PM2.5 and NOX emissions as a result of the
sustainable recovery plan
SOX

PM2.5

NOX

‐1%
‐2%
‐3%
‐4%
‐5%
‐6%
Levels of all three air pollutants would fall as a result of the sustainable recovery plan,
leading to substantial improvements in air quality, especially in households and cities.
Note: Indicates the difference in air pollutant emissions from sustainable recovery plan relative to a case
with no increase in energy sector spending.

IEA. All rights reserved

The sustainable recovery plan would also lead to reductions in the levels of the three main
air pollutants (sulfur oxides [SOX], particulate matter [PM2.5], and nitrogen oxides [NOX])
compared with what would otherwise happen. These pollutants are largely responsible for
poor air quality and are a major public health hazard (Figure 3.11). The decline in the use of
coal, mostly for power generation, is the main cause of lower SOX emissions. The shift away
from the traditional use of biomass in cooking towards modern and clean alternatives is the
main factor leading to the large reductions in PM2.5. Lower oil use in transport is the main
cause of reduced NOX emissions.
Some of the measures, particularly those involving new infrastructure such as transmission
lines, power plants and roads for maintenance, would have an impact on biodiversity and
natural ecosystems. It is important that all new infrastructure should be developed in ways
that minimise environmental impacts.
Chapter 3 | A sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector

125

3

3.3.4

Energy security and resilience

The sustainable recovery plan improves security and resilience in a number of ways. It
stimulates investment in electricity networks and energy storage, which reduces the risk of
supply disruptions; it helps to modernise grids, thus strengthening the ability to withstand
and recover from shocks; and it increases affordable access to energy services, helps to
integrate increasing shares of variable renewable electricity, and improves system
reliability.
The resilience of low-income economies would be substantially improved by increased
energy efficiency, better access to electricity and progress on clean cooking solutions. Such
improvements would be particularly beneficial for women, who are generally responsible
for collecting fuel and cooking, and who have the highest exposure to fine particulate
matter. Investment in networks, mini-grids and residential standalone systems under the
sustainable recovery plan mean that around 270 million people gain access to electricity
over the period to 2023, while investment in modern and clean cooking solutions move
around 420 million people away from the traditional use of biomass, significantly reducing
premature deaths from air pollution (Figure 3.12).
Figure 3.12 ⊳ People gaining access to electricity and clean cooking as a
Million people

result of the sustainable recovery plan

500

Other
Other Asia

400

India
300

Sub-Saharan Africa

200
100

Gain access to electricity

Gain access to clean cooking

IEA. All rights reserved

Nearly 270 million people gain access to electricity and 420 million gain access to clean
cooking by the end of the recovery plan, mostly in sub-Saharan Africa, Asia and India.

The recent reduction in LPG prices substantially reduces the payback period for households
switching to LPG cooking equipment, so long as savings are passed on to consumers and
not accompanied by tax increases. Governments may wish to consider implementing price
caps to avoid volatility in LPG prices affecting affordability for low-income consumers, or
instituting targeted subsidies, as has been done in India. Establishing clean cooking
infrastructure in rural areas would improve the ability of governments to reach and support
these populations, particularly during times of crisis.
126

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Energy poverty and the affordability of energy is a critical concern for policy makers.
Assuming that prices remain unchanged, there would be important reductions in consumer
bills by the end of the sustainable recovery plan compared with a case without this
spending as a result of fuel switching and energy efficiency measures (Figure 3.13).
Figure 3.13 ⊳ Reduction in consumer oil and electricity bills as a result of the
sustainable recovery plan

Advanced economies

Rest of world
Oil
Electricity

-1%

-2%

-3%

-4%

Despite the need for upfront spending, consumer oil and electricity bills
would be lower as a result of the sustainable recovery plan.

IEA. All rights reserved

Note: Indicates the difference in consumer bills from the sustainable recovery plan relative to a case with no
increase in energy sector spending.

Chapter 3 | A sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector

127

3

IEA. All rights reserved

Annex A
Employment analysis methodology
Jobs analysis
To estimate the employment impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic and the proposed
economic recovery and stimulus packages, the IEA developed a new methodology to
estimate employment in energy-related sectors. This analysis estimates:


The number of people employed before the Covid-19 crisis in major energy supply and
end-use sectors, including electricity, oil, natural gas, coal and biofuels.



The number of jobs likely to be lost in these sectors due to the Covid-19 crisis and the
number of jobs that could be created by government support for the energy sector in
recovery packages.

The analysis primarily relies on the use of “employment multipliers” which estimate how
many jobs are created or maintained per million US dollars invested in new infrastructure
or spent on certain goods. This technical annex describes:


How employment is defined and the scope of calculations, together with the rationale
for the approach adopted.



The methodology used to assess the multipliers.



How multipliers were developed.



The use of multipliers within the IEA World Energy Model.

Definition and scope of employment

IEA. All rights reserved

The definitions used in this report are:


Direct: Jobs created to deliver a final project or product.



Indirect: Supply chain jobs created to provide inputs to a final project or product.



Induced: Jobs created by wages earned from the projects and spent in other parts of
the economy, thereby creating additional jobs.



Cost savings re-spend: Jobs created by reduced customer energy costs being spent
elsewhere in an economy. These jobs, also referred to as second-order jobs, can also
be negative, if, for example, the cost of energy were to rise for consumers in the wider
economy, leading to a reduction in spending in other parts of an economy.

Employment encompasses all direct jobs and the indirect jobs from suppliers providing
immediate inputs to the production of the primary sector. Induced jobs and jobs that may
be created from re-spend are not included. This sets a clear boundary around the jobs that
the upfront investment would pay for to deliver the project. Where possible, we highlight
where jobs created are high paying and in low cost areas, meaning that there is likely to be
a high level of induced jobs. We also highlight where investments pay back quickly and

Annex A | Employment calculation methodology

129

produce cost savings over their lifetime, potentially giving consumers increased scope for
spending in higher value-added sectors.
Jobs are normalised to full-time employment (FTE) for consistent accounting. An FTE job
represents one person’s work for one year at regulated norms (e.g. 40 hours a week for
52 weeks a year, excluding holidays). Two separate, six-month jobs would be counted as
one FTE job.
Jobs are reported as either job-years or jobs. The “job-years” term is used to report the
cumulative years of FTE over a period of time. The term “jobs” is used to report
employment during a single year or an average over a period. Job-years accounts for total
employment created directly by a project making comparable employment that may spike
during construction phases, then level off at much lower levels during operation, which
may continue for 20 years or more. Jobs indicate how many people will be employed in
certain industries during a specified period of time.
The use of job-years or jobs does not imply anything about the permanency of the jobs.
This is understandably important to policy makers who want to avoid creating jobs that
disappear once recovery plan funding stops. We avoid classifying jobs as permanent or
temporary because many jobs that are technically classified as temporary (i.e. predicated
on the demand for projects and production or construction) may in fact offer long-term
employment opportunities by leading to jobs working on future projects after the
economic recovery spending dissipates.
Where possible, the jobs created are classified as:


Manufacturing: Jobs producing direct inputs to an energy project.



Construction: Jobs installing, constructing and commissioning energy projects.



Operations and maintenance (O&M): All ongoing jobs required to support the proper
operation of an energy project.

IEA. All rights reserved

Manufacturing and construction jobs are calculated over the lifetime of the production and
construction phase of projects, while O&M jobs are calculated over the usable lifetime of
the energy project. O&M jobs are always accounted for separately from the jobs created by
economic stimulus spending, since they are not paid for by the initial stimulus investment.
We report only the gross number of job-years or jobs created. Gross effects include only
the positive impact on employment associated with the investment. Net job creation
considers job losses in other economic sectors that may occur by redirecting investment
away from these areas. We focus on gross job creation to reflect the current job market,
where job losses are occurring in many sectors, and where increased spending will likely be
necessary to sustain jobs. The gross number of jobs created or sustained by spending in the
energy sector provides a clear point of comparison to weigh job creation benefits in energy
relative to other sectors.

130

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Choice of methodology
Employment is most commonly calculated using one or a combination of three techniques:


Computable general equilibrium (CGE) modelling.



Input-output (I-O) modelling.



Employment multipliers.

We used employment multipliers because we wanted to provide detailed employment
numbers for specific energy technologies, and CGE or I-O models are generally unable to
provide this level of granularity. The use of employment multipliers also means that
employment created by an investment can be isolated from other macroeconomic factors
that could otherwise impact the levels of job creation.
Although employment multipliers were primarily used to calculate employment figures for
this analysis, the other methods helped to calibrate employment multipliers for subsectors,
and served as points of comparison. For example, I-O tables from the Organisation of
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) were used to verify and provide
estimates of indirect jobs in certain industries.

Employment multipliers
The database of multipliers was compiled based on existing literature, industry
engagement, surveys of government statistical accounts and macroeconomic modelling. It
represents a state-of-the-art database of subsectoral employment levels across the energy
sector. The method to produce the full subset of multipliers is described below (data
sources are listed by sector in section 1.3). Broadly, the method was based on:


Gathering employment multipliers at regional or global levels.



Filtering and adjusting multipliers to ensure consistency in the types of jobs included,
adjusting for inflation and eliminating older references where prices and labour
efficiency have changed significantly.



Estimating multipliers for regions and technology types where insufficient primary
estimates exist.

Gathering multiplier input data

IEA. All rights reserved

Measures use one of two types of multipliers: those whose denominators are in million US
dollars invested, and those whose denominators are in million US dollars spent on final
goods. The denominator used is dependent on the nature of the measure, and in particular
whether it aims to encourage investment in assets or consumer purchases.
We focus on new employment multipliers. These give the number of new jobs created by
an incremental investment of $1 million or an increase of $1 million in final goods. They
differ from active employment multipliers, expressed as jobs per million dollars of existing
revenue, which more closely reflect O&M employment.
Annex A | Employment calculation methodology

131

A

The primary sources used include:


I/O tables, employment requirement matrices and national accounts.



Academic, intergovernmental research and modelling results.



Individual company and industry group estimates.



Calculated multipliers from legal financial filings that provide information on
employment and revenue, cost breakdowns for projects and average wages.

I-O tables and government surveys of businesses were prioritised, when available with
sufficient detail, to support the subsectoral analysis (e.g. the North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) codes or the European Nomenclature of Economic Activities
(NACE) codes), which provide detailed data at the level of pumps and compressor
manufacturing). If these were not available, the master NAICS or equivalent codes were
used to guide our multipliers (e.g. is the multiplier for electric chargers within two standard
deviations of the generalised multiplier for electrical equipment manufacturing). These
were used to filter out other multipliers that vary too far from the average.
Employment and financial information were extracted from the annual reports of major
companies in each sector. Data for different years were used to estimate how changes in
investment levels (derived from the IEA’s World Energy Investment 2020 report 1) impacted
changes in employment. This method could only be used for sectors with a high degree of
consolidation in major firms that are publicly listed.

IEA. All rights reserved

Material from academic and industry sources was screened to ensure harmonised
definitions and reference values were adjusted to adhere to the framework described. In
other words, if there was insufficient information to make adjustments, sources that did
not adhere to these definitions were removed. It is worth noting in particular that:


Direct component manufacturing is often included in direct employment instead of
indirect. Where possible, manufacturing jobs are reclassified as indirect, or have not
made a distinction between direct and indirect jobs for that multiplier.



Estimates of indirect jobs sometimes include jobs created to support the operation
and maintenance of the project or equipment. These are reported separately to clarify
that they are not paid for by the Covid-19 stimulus investment.



Indirect sometimes includes jobs “supported” by the purchase where the equipment is
a key enabler for another job, for example, automobile manufacturing is a key enabler
for delivery and taxi driving jobs. These “supported” jobs are not included in our
analysis.

Where values from these sources were unavailable, estimates were based on employment
multipliers for similar technologies. Cost breakdowns for building new projects or the
production of one unit were used to estimate how much of the million dollars spent went
1 https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-investment-2020.

132

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

to labour or materials. Based on available wage information for subsectors, direct labour
was calculated by dividing total labour cost contribution by average wages. For indirect
multipliers, the amount spent on materials in the original project was multiplied by an
average multiplier from direct supplier industries. If it was not possible to isolate primary
supplier industries, or their multipliers were not available, multipliers were used from
higher level NAIC codes as a proxy for the indirect labour multiplier.
Once these multipliers were assembled, historic values were adjusted to express them in
2020 US dollars. Weighted averages of the full list of associated references were taken,
basing those on the relevant and rigour the source material, to control for outliers.
Multipliers were tested with companies within IEA’s Energy Business Council, peer
reviewers, experts from academia, industry groups and other international organisations
(such as the International Monetary Fund and International Labour Organization).

Regional multipliers

IEA. All rights reserved

Employment data is not available for all regions and so regional multipliers were
constructed based on wage differences for the standard regions in the IEA World Energy
Model (WEM).These regional multipliers were arrived at by a variety of means, but most
were created through the use of wage adjustments. This process involved:


Identifying the cost contribution breakdown for $1 million spent on new projects or
products for regions with existing multipliers (e.g. 10% labour, 50% materials, 10%
equipment costs). These breakdowns were derived using detailed manufacturer
surveys, primarily from the US Annual Manufacturer’s Survey data which provide
information on the contribution to costs of average wages, labour and materials.
Industry evaluation and heuristics were used to confirm breakdowns or provide more
granular breakdowns for specific technology types.



Adapting the cost contribution breakdown to each region, taking specific account of
how differences in wages and material costs shift the relative shares of labour and
material. Average wages and basic material costs were indexed on the basis of US
costs, and these were applied to the labour and material costs for a $1 million project
or purchase to calculate how much that same purchase would cost to produce in a
low-wage economy. For example, in the United States $1 million spent on batteries
represents roughly $140 000 for labour costs, but when adjusting for low-wage
economies, producing the same amount of batteries would only be $3 000 in labour
costs. We then need to adjust the amount of batteries back up to arrive at a $1 million
purchase in low-wage economies. If labour is much cheaper than project inputs, then
the percent contributions of labour and material costs shift in low-wage economies.
We provide an example calculation below in Table 1.1. We utilised local wages,
average cost differential of input materials, share of imports in production and the
costs of those imports to arrive at adjusted cost contribution breakdowns for various
regions. These inputs were derived from the global balance of trade in value added. In

Annex A | Employment calculation methodology

133

A

lower cost economies, the labour index is lower than the material cost index, resulting
in the proportion of total project or product cost accounted for by labour costs going
down, and the proportion of total cost accounted for by input materials going up.


Finding average wages for relevant jobs in a region by using national average salary
information specific to a subsector. Where information on wages specific to a
subsector was not available, average wages from salary reporting websites were used,
splitting the labour costs to distinguish between those associated with production and
manufacturing and those associated with overheads (e.g. research and development,
procurement and marketing). To calibrate the correct weighting of various salary
types, average wages were used for generalised sectors (e.g. manufacturing of durable
goods, construction) to provide guidance. For technologies that have a relatively
globalised market (e.g. solar photovoltaic panels), a global average of salaries is
assumed based on each countries’ share of total production. This provides an indirect
multiplier that can be applied to all regions.



Calculating jobs per million dollars for the expenditure by dividing the portion spent
on salaries by average salaries. The indirect multiplier for advanced economies was
used as a basis for indirect jobs, and the rectification multiplier for each country was
applied to calculate indirect jobs. Since inputs for industries can be diverse across the
entire economy, the rectification multiplier, which uses generalised wages, reflects
economy-wide cost differences and does not need to apply specific wage types to
arrive at more exact direct jobs numbers.

Table A.1 ⊳

Example calculation of labour contributions in different regions

Base
($ million)

Cost
adjustment
index

Low-wage
economies
($ million)

Low-wage economies,
rescaled to $1 million

Labour

0.15

0.1

0.15*0.1= 0.015

(0.15+0.5)/(0.015+0.3)*0.015 = 0.031

Materials

0.5

0.6

0.50*0.6= 0.3

(0.15+0.5)/(0.015+0.3)*0.3 = 0.62

Calculating total employment
The final employment multipliers were integrated with the WEM by applying the
multipliers to the appropriate sector and regional investments.

IEA. All rights reserved

These multipliers were used to:


Support the calculation for total jobs pre-Covid-19 crisis in key energy sectors.



Calculate new jobs created by Covid-19 recovery and stimulus spending.



Calculate jobs lost or at risk due to decreased investment in subsequent years.

In all cases, the multipliers were applied to investment or changes in investment, not
revenues or total assets, to calculate the number of jobs created by or necessary to support
the level of new investment. When providing jobs within a single year, we considered for
134

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

how long and when an investment or purchase creates those jobs. For instance, investment
in a new hydroelectric dam would create some jobs in the planning and preparation phase
prior to the investment: when financial close occurs, these jobs disappear, but construction
and equipment manufacturing jobs are created; when construction is completed, these
jobs disappear, but O&M jobs begin. Jobs are assigned to the relevant years to understand
total employment on an annual basis.

Pre-Covid-19 crisis jobs
Pre-Covid jobs include both O&M jobs associated with the existing asset base and jobs
supporting the investments made in the preceding years:


O&M jobs associated with the existing asset base were estimated using employment
surveys and census data, annual reports of major companies, academic research, and
multipliers derived by estimating the number of employees associated with different
facilities and scaling them up in line with total facilities globally. There were substantial
gaps in current employment data, and these were estimated and these estimates were
tested with experts.



Jobs supporting the investments made in previous years were calculated by applying
the multipliers to new investment in the immediately preceding years, using data on
new investment from the IEA’s World Energy Investment 2020 report This is used to
estimate how many manufacturing and construction jobs were supported by projects
underway or in the pipeline prior to Covid-19 related stimulus responses.



The two totals were added together to produce the total pre-Covid jobs figure for
energy industries used in Chapter 1.

New jobs

IEA. All rights reserved

Multipliers were applied to the level of investment included in the plan for each year to
calculate total jobs in 2021, 2022, and 2023. Figures for the jobs created take account of
the timing delays between investment and job creation for each subsector. They also take
account of minimum lead times for projects already through the feasibility study phase to
move from plan to financial close.
Investment numbers were produced for each region and subsector, and the corresponding
multipliers were applied for each region. For investments in which figures for
manufacturing, construction and O&M jobs are available, a breakdown was produced of
the types of skills needed for those jobs and the regions where those jobs would be
created. For technologies with a highly globalised supply chain, manufacturing jobs are
divided across regions according to current production capacities. For technologies that
have very localised production, such as building materials and biofuels, all manufacturing
jobs were assumed to be created locally.

Annex A | Employment calculation methodology

135

A

Jobs lost

IEA. All rights reserved

Multipliers were applied to the decline in the level of investment between 2019 and 2020
to calculate how many jobs in construction and manufacturing are likely to have been lost
in the long-run due to structurally decreased demand if investment levels are not
bolstered. These job numbers are different from many of the job numbers that have been
reported in the press, which are often based on unemployment filings and reflect workers
who may be on temporary furlough or whose wages are hourly and are forgone during
lockdowns. Press reports also often use information from industry associations and
companies, many of which report “jobs at risk” on the basis that projects that are stalled
will not proceed after lockdowns have been lifted, and that all jobs connected with such
stalled projects will be lost. These two types of numbers do not reflect structural losses,
and are therefore not considered in our analysis. As a result, the jobs lost estimates
provided are much lower than those that have been reported in the press. Our estimates
provide a more accurate reflection of the number of jobs truly at risk as a result of
decreased investment.

136

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Data sources

IEA. All rights reserved

General/cross-cutting


NASEO and EFI (National Association of State Energy Officials and Energy Futures
Initiative)
(2020),
US
Energy
and
Employment
Report
2020,
https://www.usenergyjobs.org/.



Eurostat (2020), Employment Statistics (database), European
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat, (accessed date month year).



U.S.
Census
Bureau
(2020)
(database),
U.S.
https://data.census.gov/cedsci/, (accessed date month year).



National Bureau of Statistics of China, http://www.stats.gov.cn/english/, (accessed
date month year).



ILO (International Labour Organization) Statistics (database), https://ilostat.ilo.org/,
(accessed date month year).



OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) (2020), Trade in
Value Added Tables, https://www.oecd.org/sti/ind/measuring-trade-in-valueadded.htm, (accessed date month year).



OECD (2020), Input-Output Tables (database), http://www.oecd.org/sti/ind/inputoutputtables.htm, (accessed date month year).



OECD (2020), STAN STructural Analysis STAN (database), www.oecd.org/
sti/ind/stanstructuralanalysisdatabase.htm, (accessed date month year).



Glassdoor (2020) Global wage benchmarks data, https://www.glassdoor.fr, (accessed
date month year).



Payscale (2020), Global wage benchmarks data,
(accessed date month year).



Salary Expert.com and ERI. Accessed for various wage benchmarks globally June 2020.
https://www.salaryexpert.com/.



World Bank (2020), Adjusted net national income per capita indicators,
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.ADJ.NNTY.PC.CD, (accessed date month
year).



OECD’s Average Annual Wages table. OECD, 2020. Accessed June 2020.
https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=AV_AN_WAGE.



United Nations Economic commission for Europe. UNECE Statistical Database.
Accessed May 2020. https://w3.unece.org/PXWeb2015/pxweb/en/STAT/STAT__20ME__3-MELF/60_en_MECCWagesY_r.px/?rxid=0806c85a-23f8-4249-a4d010980df459d1.



Average income around the world. WorldData.info. https://www.worlddata.info/
average-income.php.

Annex A | Employment calculation methodology

Commission.

Census

Bureau,

https://www.payscale.com/,

137

A

Electricity

IEA. All rights reserved

Note: Electricity network employment data was compiled from over 260 annual reports
of grid operators and grid asset suppliers.


Cambridge Econometrics, (2013), Employment Effects of Selected Scenarios from the
Energy roadmap 2050, final report for the European Commission,
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/2013_report_employment_e
ffects_roadmap_2050_2.pdf.



Council on Energy, Environment and Water, Natural Resources Defense Council and
Skill Council for Green Jobs (2019), Powering Jobs Growth with Green Energy, Council
Issue Brief, July 2019, https://www.ceew.in/publications/powering-jobs-growth.



Council on Energy, Environment and Water, Natural Resources Defense Council and
Skill Council for Green Jobs (2019), Future Skills and Job Creation with Renewable
Energy in India: Assessing the Co-Benefits of Decarbonising the Power Sector,
COBENEFITS Study, October 2019, https://www.ceew.in/sites/default/files/future.pdf.



GWEC (Global Wind Energy Council), forthcoming.



ESMAP (Energy Sector Management Assistance Program) (2019), Mini-Grids for Half a
Billion People: Market Outlook and Handbook for Decision Makers, World Bank,
Washington, DC., https://esmap.org/mini_grids_for_half_a_billion_people.



Eurelectric (2013), Power Distribution in Europe, Facts & Figures,
https://cdn.eurelectric.org/media/1835/dso_report-web_final-2013-030-0764-01-e-hD66B0486.pdf.



EurObserv’ER (2019), The State of Renewable Energies in Europe, 19th EurObserv’ER
Report, https://www.eurobserv-er.org/19th-annual-overview-barometer/.



European Commission (2019), EU Energy in Figures Statistical Pocketbook 2019,
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/data-analysis/energy-statistical-pocketbook_en.



GOGLA (Global Off Grid Lighting Association) (2018), Off-Grid Solar: A Growth Engine
for Jobs, https://www.gogla.org/resources/off-grid-solar-a-growth-engine-for-jobs.



GOGLA (2020), Powering Opportunity: Energising Work, Enterprise and Quality of Life
with
Off-Grid
Solar,
https://www.gogla.org/resources/powering-opportunityenergising-work-enterprise-and-quality-of-life-with-off-grid-solar.



ILO (International Labour Organisation) (2018), The Transition in Play: Worldwide
Employment Trends in the Electricity Sector, https://www.ilo.org/global/
research/publications/working-papers/WCMS_625865/lang--en/index.htm.



IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency) (2019), Renewable Energy and Jobs
Annual Review 2019, https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/
2019/Jun/IRENA_RE_Jobs_2019-report.pdf.



Jenniches, S. (2018), “Assessing the Regional Economic Impacts of Renewable Energy
Sources – A Literature Review”, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, Vol. 93,
pp. 35-51, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.05.008.

138

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

IEA. All rights reserved



Juchau, C. and D. Solan (2013), “Employment Estimates in the Energy Sector: Concepts,
Methods and Results”, Energy Policy Institute, https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/256064651_Employment_Estimates_in_the_Energy_Sector_Concepts_Me
thods_and_Results.



Kammen, D. M., K. Kapadia and M. Fripp (2004), Putting Renewables to Work: How
Many Jobs can the Clean Energy Industry Generate? Report of the Renewable and
Appropriate
Energy
Laboratory,
University
of
California,
Berkeley,
http://rael.berkeley.edu/old_drupal/sites/default/files/very-oldsite/renewables.jobs.2006.pdf.



Lighting Global, GOGLA, ESMAP (2020), Off-Grid Solar Market Trends Report 2020,
Washington, DC, https://www.lightingglobal.org/resource/2020markettrendsreport/.



National Bureau of Statistics of China (2018), China Economic Census Yearbook 2018,
State Council 4th Economic Census Leading Group Office, http://data.cnki.net/
area/Yearbook/Single/N2020040370?z=D26.



NREL (US National Renewable Energy Laboratory) (2014), Jobs & Economic
Development Impact Models, https://www.nrel.gov/analysis/jedi/models.html.



NEA (Nuclear Energy Agency) and IAEA (International Atomic Energy Agency) (2018),
Measuring Employment Generated by Nuclear Power Sector, https://www.oecdnea.org/ndd/pubs/2018/7204-employment-nps.pdf.



Nuclear Energy Institute (2014), Nuclear Energy’s Economic Benefits – Current and
Future,
https://workshop1.cases.som.yale.edu/sites/default/files/cases/the_future
_of_nuclear_in_connecticut/NEI_Economic%20Benefits%20of%20Nuclear.pdf.



Pembina Institute (2015), British Columbia Clean Energy Jobs Map, Methodology
Backgrounder,
https://www.pembina.org/pub/british-columbia-clean-energy-jobsmap.



Power for All (2019), Powering Jobs Census 2019: The Energy Access Workforce,
https://www.powerforall.org/application/files/8915/6310/7906/Powering-JobsCensus- 2019.pdf.



Ram, M., A. Aaghahosseini and C. Breyer (2019), “Job Creation during the Global
Energy Transition Towards 100% Renewable Power System by 2050”, Technological
Forecasting & Social Change, Vol. 151, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2019.06.008.



Rutovitz J., E. Dominish, and J. Downes (2015), Calculating Global Energy Sector Jobs:
2015 Methodology, prepared for Greenpeace International by the Institute for
Sustainable
Futures,
University
of
Technology
Sydney,
https://opus.lib.uts.edu.au/bitstream/10453/43718/1/Rutovitzetal2015Calculatingglo
balenergysectorjobsmethodology.pdf.



Samaras, C. et al. (2011), Characterizing the US Industrial Base for Coal-Powered
Electricity,
RAND
Corporation,
https://www.rand.org/pubs/monographs/
MG1147.html.

Annex A | Employment calculation methodology

139

A



Zhang, S. et al. (2017), “Employment Effects of Solar PV Industry in China: A
Spreadsheet-based Analytical Model”, Energy Policy, Vol. 109, pp. 59-65,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.05.008.



Teske, S. (ed.) (2019), Achieving the
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05843-2.



The Brattle Group (2015), The Nuclear Industry’s Contribution to the US Economy,
prepared for Nuclear Matters, https://brattlefiles.blob.core.windows.net/files/
5921_the_nuclear_industry's_contribution_to_the_u.s._economy.pdf.



The Solar Foundation (2020), 10th Annual National Solar Jobs Census 2019,
https://www.thesolarfoundation.org/solar-jobs-census/.



Wei, M., S. Patadia and D. Kammen (2010), “Putting Renewables and Energy Efficiency
to Work: How many Jobs can the Clean Energy Industry Generate in the US?” Energy
Policy, Vol. 38, pp. 919-931, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2009.10.044.

Paris

Climate

Agreement

Goals,

Transport
New vehicles


ACEA (European Automobile Manufacturers Association) (2019), Employment trends in
the EU automotive industry, https://www.acea.be/statistics/article/employment.



Bauer, W., Riedel, O., Hermann, F., Borrmann, D., and Sachs, C. (2018), Perspektiven
des Wirtschaftsstandorts Deutschland in Zeiten zunehmender Elektromobilität (The
Effects of Vehicle Electrification on Employment in Germany), Fraunhofer Institute for
Systems and Innovation Research.



OICA (International Organization of Motor Vehicle Manufacturers) (2020),
Employment in the automotive industry, http://www.oica.net/employment-in-theautomotive-industry/.



Soman, A., Ganesan, K. and Kaur, H. (2019), India’s Electric Vehicle Transition: Impact
on Auto Industry and Building the EV Ecosystem, Council on Energy, Environment and
Water, https://www.ceew.in/publications/india’s-electric-vehicle-transition.

IEA. All rights reserved

Urban transport infrastructure


Blondiau, T. and van Zeebroeck, B. (2014), European Cyclists’ Federation - Cycling
Works – Jobs and Job Creation in the Cycling Economy,



https://ecf.com/sites/ecf.com/files/141125-Cycling-Works-Jobs-and-Job-Creation-inthe-Cycling-Economy.pdf.



Garrett-Peltier H. (2011), Pedestrian and bicycle infrastructure: A national study of
employment impacts, Political Economy Research Institute, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst.



Grous A. (2011), The British Cycling Economy: Gross cycling product report, London
School of Economics, http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/38063/1/BritishCyclingEconomy.pdf.

140

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report



ITDP (Institute for Transportation & Development Policy) and the University of
California, Davis (2015,. A Global High Shift Cycling Scenario: The Potential for
Dramatically Increasing Bicycle and E-bike Use in Cities around the World, with
Estimated Energy, CO2, and Cost Impacts, https://itdpdotorg.wpengine.com/wpcontent/uploads/2015/11/A-Global-High-Shift-Cycling-Scenario_Nov-2015.pdf.



UIC (International Union of Railways) (2017) Analysis of Global Rail Infrastructure
Investment,
https://uic.org/IMG/pdf/analysis_of_global_rail_infrastructure_investment.pdf.

IEA. All rights reserved

High speed rail


ARM (Advanced Resource Managers). 2020. HS2 Is Creating Rail Jobs,
https://www.arm.co.uk/resources/blog/industry-news/it-may-be-controversial-buths2-is-creating-rail-jobs, (Accessed 6 May 2020).



Bloomberg, 2019, California's High-Speed Rail Cost Grows By About $2 Billion,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-05-01/california-s-high-speed-railline-cost-grows-by-about-2-billion, (Accessed 5 May 2020).



Economic Times (2017), India's bullet train might create 20,000 employment
opportunities,
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/jobs/pm-modis-bullet-trainmight-create-20000-employment-opportunities-sbi/articleshow/60516328.cms?from
=mdr, (Accessed 8 May 2020).



Frontiers, 2019, The Total Social Costs Of Constructing And Operating A High-Speed
Rail Line Using A Case Study Of The Riyadh-Dammam Corridor, Saudi Arabia,
https://www.frontiersin.org/files/Articles/449077/fbuil-05-00079-HTML/image_m/
fbuil-05-00079-t005.jpg, (Accessed 11 May 2020).



Global Railway Review, 2019, California High-Speed Railway Project Creates 3,000
Construction Jobs, https://www.globalrailwayreview.com/news/87742/california-highspeed-authority-3000-jobs/, (Accessed 7 May 2020).



In The Black, 2015, Bullet Trains And The Economics Of High-Speed Railways,
https://www.intheblack.com/articles/2015/09/01/bullet-trains-and-the-economics-ofhigh-speed-railways, (Accessed 11 May 2020).



Janic, M. (2016), A multi-dimensional examination of performances of HSR systems, TU
Delft, https://doi.org/10.1007/s40534-015-0094-y, (Accessed 8 May 2020).



McCarthy, N., 2019, Infographic: The U.S. Trails The World In High-Speed Rail, Statista
Infographics, https://www.statista.com/chart/17093/miles-of-high-speed-rail-track-inoperation-by-country, (Accessed 11 May 2020).



New York Times, 2010, China Sees Growth Engine In A Web Of Fast Trains,
https://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/13/business/global/13rail.html?pagewanted=all,
(Accessed 11 May 2020).

Annex A | Employment calculation methodology

141

A



Railway Technology, 2020, Tours–Bordeaux High-Speed Rail - Railway Technology,
https://www.railway-technology.com/projects/toursbordeaux-high-speed-rail,
(Accessed 6 May 2020).



The Star (2018), KL-Singapore High Speed Rail to generate 70,000 jobs, Singapore,
https://www.thestar.com.my/business/business-news/2018/05/03/kl-singapore-highspeed-rail-to-generate-70000-jobs, (Accessed 6 May 2020).



UIC (2018), High Speed Rail: Fast Track to Sustainable Mobility,
https://uic.org/IMG/pdf/uic_high_speed_2018_ph08_web.pdf, (Accessed 8 May
2020).



UIC (Union Internationale des Chemins de Fer) (2020), High speed rail database and
maps,
https://uic.org/passenger/highspeed/article/high-speed-database-maps,
(Accessed 4 May 2020).



US Government Accountability Office (2009), High Speed Passenger Rail: Future
Development Will Depend on Addressing Financial and Other Challenges and
Establishing a Clear Federal Role, https://books.google.fr/books?id=GoKmHiu35bQC&l
pg=PA38&dq=lead%20times%20for%20high%20speed%20rail%20projects&hl=fr&pg=
PA38#v=onepage&q=lead%20times%20for%20high%20speed%20rail%20projects&f=
false, (Accessed 8 May 2020).

Buildings

IEA. All rights reserved

Retrofits and new buildings


Anderson, D., Belzer, D. B., Livingston, O. V., and Scott, M. J. (2014), Assessing
National Employment Impacts of Investment in Residential and Commercial Sector
Energy Efficiency: Review and Example Analysis (PNNL-23402, 1135715), Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory. https://doi.org/10.2172/1135715.



Bell, C., J. Barret and M. McNerney (2015), Verifying Energy Efficiency Job Creation:
American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy, https://www.aceee.org/sites/
default/files/publications/researchreports/f1501.pdf.



Booz Allen Hamilton (2015), Green Building Economic Impact Study, U.S. Green
Building
Council,
https://usgbcnj.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/Booz_Allen_
Economic_Report.pdf.



Bremer Energie Institut, Institut Wohnen und Umwelt and Institut für Statistik der
Universität Bremen (2008), Effekte des CO2-Gebäudesanierungs-programms 2008,
(Effects
of
the
CO2
Building
Renovation
Program
2008).
https://www.kfw.de/Download-Center/Konzernthemen/Research/PDF-Dokumentealle-Evaluationen/Effekte-CO2-Geb%C3%A4udesanierung-2008.pdf.



Cambridge Econometrics (2015), Assessing the Employment and Social Impact of
Energy Efficiency Vol. 1: Main report, https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/
documents/CE_EE_Jobs_main%2018Nov2015.pdf.

142

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report



Cambridge Econometrics (2015), Assessing the Employment and Social Impact of
Energy Efficiency Vol. 2: Appendices, https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/
documents/CE_EE_Jobs_appendices%2018Nov2015.pdf.



DNV GL (2015), National evaluation of the state energy program: an evaluation of
select activities conducted under the state energy program. Prepared for the US
Department of Energy under the supervision of Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
https://weatherization.ornl.gov/wp-content/uploads/pdf/SEPEvaluation/
SEPReportVolI.pdf.



Ehrhardt-Martinez, K. and J. Laitner (2008), The Size of the US Energy Efficiency
Market,
American
Council
for
an
Energy-Efficient
Economy,
https://www.aceee.org/sites/default/files/publications/researchreports/E083.pdf



Garrett-Peltier, H. (2011), Employment Estimates for Energy Efficiency Retrofits of
Commercial Buildings, Political Economy Research Institute, University of
Massachusetts, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/254455011_Employment_
Estimates_for_Energy_Efficiency_Retrofits_of_Commercial_Buildings.



Janssen, R. and D. Staniaszek (2012), How Many Jobs? A Survey of the Employment
Effects of Investment in Energy Efficiency of Buildings, The Energy Efficiency Industrial
Forum, https://euroace.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/2012-How-Many-Jobs.pdf.



Mitsidi Projetos (2019), Potencial de empregos gerados na área de Eficiência
Energética no Brasil de 2018 até 2030, (Energy efficiency job creation potential in
Brazil: 2018 to 2030), http://www.abrinstal.org.br/docs/empregos_mme.pdf.



Pollin, R., J. Heintz and H. Garrett-Peltier (2009), The Economic Benefits of Investing in
Clean Energy, https://www.peri.umass.edu/fileadmin/pdf/other_publication_types/
green_economics/economic_benefits/economic_benefits.PDF.



Saheb, Y. (2016), Energy Transition of the EU Building Stock,
https://www.openexp.eu/sites/default/files/publication/files/Reports/energy_transiti
on_of_the_eu_building_stock_full_report.pdf.



Scheer, J. and B. Motherway (2011), Economic Analysis of Residential and SmallBusiness Energy Efficiency Improvements, Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland,
https://www.seai.ie/publications/Economic-Analysis-of-Residential-and-SmallBusiness-Energy-Efficiency-Improvements.pdf.



Tonn, B., Carroll, D., Rose, E. M., Hawkins, B. A., Pigg, S., Dalhoff, G., Blasnik, M.,
Eisenberg, J. F., Cowan, C., and Conlon, B. (2015), Weatherization Works II: Summary
of Findings from the ARRA Period Evaluation of the US Department of Energy’s
Weatherization Assistance Program, https://doi.org/10.2172/1223654.

IEA. All rights reserved

Appliances


New Jersey Government (2009), State Energy Efficient Appliance Rebate Program Plan
Narrative, https://www.nj.gov/bpu/pdf/announcements/EEARP.pdf.

Annex A | Employment calculation methodology

143

A



Office of Economic Opportunity, Virgin Islands Public Finance Authority (2012), ProjectEnergy Efficient Appliance Rebate Program, http://oeo.usvipfa.com/Home/
ProjectDetails/174.



Talan, R. (2018), Beyond Energy Savings: The Multiple Benefits of Mexico’s Household
Appliances Phase-out Scheme, https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/imports/
events/211/Day1_3RT.pdf.

Clean cooking


Budya H. and M. Y. Arofat (2011), “Providing cleaner energy access in Indonesia
through the megaproject of kerosene conversion to LPG”, Energy Policy Vol. 39, pp.
7575–7586.



GLPGP (Global LPG Partnership) (2018), National Feasibility Assessment: LPG for Clean
Cooking in Ghana, New York, http://glpgp.org/s/GLPGP-Clean-Cooking-for-AfricaGhana-National-Assessment-2018.pdf.



GLPGP (2019), National Feasibility Assessment: LPG for Clean Cooking in Cameroon,
New York, http://glpgp.org/s/GLPGP-Clean-Cooking-for-Africa-Cameroon-NationalAssessment-2019.pdf.



GLPGP (2019), National Feasibility Assessment: LPG for Clean Cooking in Kenya, New
York, http://glpgp.org/s/GLPGP-Clean-Cooking-for-Africa-Kenya-National-Assessment2019.pdf.



IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency) (2019), Renewable Energy and Jobs
Annual Review 2019, https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/
2019/Jun/IRENA_RE_Jobs_2019-report.pdf.



Lee, C.-J., R. Shirley, M. Otieno and H. Nyambura (year), Powering Jobs: The
Employment Footprint of Clean Cooking Solutions in Kenya, Working Paper.



Lucon, O., S. T. Coelho and J. Goldemberg (2004), LPG in Brazil: lessons and challenges.
São Paulo State Environmental Secretariat, São Paulo.

Industry

IEA. All rights reserved

Industry efficiency


Cambridge Econometrics (2015), Assessing the Employment and Social Impact of
Energy Efficiency Volume 1: Main report, https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/
files/documents/CE_EE_Jobs_main%2018Nov2015.pdf.



Cambridge Econometrics (2015), Assessing the Employment and Social Impact of
Energy Efficiency Volume 2: Appendices, https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/
files/documents/CE_EE_Jobs_appendices%2018Nov2015.pdf.



EHPA
(European
Heat
Pump
https://www.ehpa.org/market-data/.

144

Association

(2018),

Market

Data,

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report



EHPA (2018), Heat Pumps - Integrating technologies to decarbonise heating and
cooling, .



European Commission (2019), Competitiveness of the heating and cooling industry and
services,
https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/b23af898-c48e11e9-9d01-01aa75ed71a1/language-en.



Ehrhardt-Martinez, K. and J. Laitner (2008), The Size of the US Energy Efficiency
Market,
American
Council
for
an
Energy-Efficient
Economy,
https://www.aceee.org/sites/default/files/publications/researchreports/E083.pdf



Institute for Sustainable Futures (2009), Energy Sector Jobs to 2030: A Global Analysis,
https://opus.lib.uts.edu.au/bitstream/10453/35047/1/rutovitzatherton2009greenjobs.
pdf.

Recycling


Denison, R. A. and J. Ruston (1990), Recycling and Incineration – Evaluating the
Choices, Island Press, Washington DC.



Marques, R. and N. da Cruz (2016), Recycling and Extended Producer Responsibility:
The European Experience, Routledge, London and New York.



NRDC (Natural Resources Defense Council) (2014), From Waste to Jobs: What
Achieving 75 Percent Recycling Means for California, https://www.nrdc.org/
sites/default/files/green-jobs-ca-recycling-report.pdf.



RDC-Environment and Pira International (2003), Evaluation of costs and benefits for
the achievement of reuse and recycling targets for the different packaging materials in
the frame of the packaging and packaging waste directive 94/62/EC,
https://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/studies/packaging/costsbenefitsannexes1_7
.pdf.



US EPA (US Environmental Protection Agency) (2016), Collection Costs,
https://archive.epa.gov/wastes/conserve/tools/localgov/web/html/collection.html.

Fuels

IEA. All rights reserved

Oil and gas


China Academic Journal Electronic Publishing House (2020), “Urban units employment
and total wages by sector 2017”, http://www.cnki.net.



Energy Futures Initiative and National Association of State Energy Officials (NASEO)
(2020), 2020 US Energy and Employment Report (USEER). NASEO and EFI. Washington,
DC.
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5a98cf80ec4eb7c5cd928c61/t/
5e78b3c756e8367abbd47ab0/1584968660321/USEER+2020+0323.pdf.



European
Commission,
(2020)
Eurostat
2019
Employment
Report,.
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/3217494/5706635/KS-BW-09-001-02EN.PDF/ddbbf39f-c03c-40d9-a1a2-f7f6d28d61d9, (accessed 5 June 2020).

Annex A | Employment calculation methodology

145

A



IBIS World (2019) Gas Stations Industry in China - Market Research Report,
https://www.ibisworld.com/china/market-research-reports/gas-stationsindustry/#:~:text=There%20are%20about%20101%2C104%20gas,government%20pric
e%20controls%20on%20fuel.



ILO (International Labour Organization) (2020), Oil and Gas Production,
https://www.ilo.org/inform/online-information-resources/research-guides/economicand-social-sectors/energy-mining/oil-gas-production/lang--en/index.htm,
(accessed
5 June 2020).



Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (India), Indian Petroleum & Natural Gas
Statistics 2017-2018, Economic & Statistics Division, http://petroleum.nic.in/
sites/default/files/ipngstat_0.pdf.



US Bureau of Labor Statistics (2019), Oil and Gas Extraction: North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) Code 211 https://www.bls.gov/iag/tgs/iag211.htm.

We relied on the annual reports from the following companies: Abu Dhabi National Oil Co.,
Apache, Bashneft, BHP Billiton, BP, Canadian Natural Resources, Chesapeake, Chevron,
Cimarex, CNPC, CNOOC, Concho, ConocoPhillips, Continental Resources, Devon Energy
Corp, Ecopetrol SA, Egyptian General Petroleum Corp., EnCana, Eni, EOG Resources,
ExxonMobil, Freeport-McMoRan, Galp, Gazprom, Gazprom Neft, Hess Corp, Husky Energy
Inc., Imperial Oil, Inpex, KazMunaiGas EP, KNOC, Kuwait Oil Company, Lukoil, Marathon,
MOL Group, Murphy Oil Corp, National Iranian Oil Corporation, National Oil Corporation
(Libya), Nexen, Nigerian National Petroleum Corp., Noble Energy, North Oil Company,
Novatek, Occidental, OGDCL (Pakistan), OMV, ONGC (India), PDVSA, Pemex, Pertamina,
Petro SA, Petrobras, Petrochina, Petroecuador, Petroleum Development Oman, Petronas,
PetroVietnam, Pioneer Natural Resources, PTT Exploration & Production (Thai), Qatar
Petroleum Company, Repsol, Rosneft, Royal Dutch Shell, Santos Ltd., Sasol Ltd (South
Africa), Saudi Aramco, Sinopec, Socar, Sonangol, Sonatrach, Statoil, Suncor Energy Inc.,
Surgutneftegas, Total, Tullow, Uzbekneftegas, Williams Cos, Wintershall Holding, Woodside
Petroleum, YPF, China National Petroleum Corporation, Valero Energy, National Iranian Oil
Company, JX Holdings, Phillips66, China National Offshore Oil, Engie, Indian Oil Corporation,
Reliance Industries, GS Caltex, Enterprise Products, Idemitsu Kosan, Bharat Petroleum,
Hindustan Petroleum, PKN Orlen, Halliburton, Schlumberger, Hellenic Petroleum, Centrica,
Motor Oil Hellas, CEPSA, Baker Hughes Company, FMC Technologies, US Weatherford LP,
Now Inc., Iri International Corporation, Apergy Corportion, Shandong Kerui Petroleum
Equipment, Technipfmc, Weatherford International.

IEA. All rights reserved

Methane abatement


Datu Research (2014), The Emerging Methane Reduction Industry in the United States,
Environmental
Defense
Fund.
https://www.edf.org/sites/default/files/
us_methane_mitigation_industry_report.pdf.



IEA
(International
Energy
Agency)
(2020),
https://www.iea.org/reports/methane-tracker-2020.

146

Methane

Tracker

2020,

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report



US Census Bureau (2020), Annual Survey of Manufacturers -2018 data,
https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/asm.html.

Biofuels


ICA (International Civil Aviation Organization) (2019), Carbon Offsetting and Reduction
Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA) Default Life Cycle Emissions Values for
CORSIA Eligible Fuels, https://www.icao.int/environmental-protection/CORSIA/
Documents/ICAO%20document%2006%20-%20Default%20Life%20Cycle%20Emissions
.pdf.



IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency) (2019), Renewable Energy and Jobs
Annual Review 2019, https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/
2019/Jun/IRENA_RE_Jobs_2019-report.pdf.



US Census Bureau (2018), Annual Survey of Manufacturers - 2018 data,
https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/asm.html.



US
Department
of
Labor
Statistics
(2020),
Careers
in
https://www.bls.gov/green/biofuels/biofuels.htm, (accessed May 2020).

Biofuels,

IEA. All rights reserved

Coal mining


Australian Bureau of Statistics (2020), Labour Account Australia, Annual Balanced:
Subdivision,
Division
and
Total
All
Industries
(database),
http://stat.data.abs.gov.au/Index.aspx?DatasetCode=ABS_LABOUR_ACCT#, (accessed
2 June 2020).



China Academic Journal Electronic Publishing House (2020). “Urban units employment
and total wages by sector (2017)”, http://www.cnki.net.



European Commission (2018), EU coal regions: opportunities and challenges ahead,
https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/publication/eur-scientific-and-technical-researchreports/eu-coal-regions-opportunities-and-challenges-ahead.



Mining Review Africa (2018), South Africa’s coal sector headed for major job losses,
2 November 2018, https://www.miningreview.com/news/coal-job-losses/.



Minerals Council South Africa (2020), Facts and Figures 2019 Pocketbook,
https://www.mineralscouncil.org.za/industry-news/publications/facts-and-figures.



NASEO and EFI (National Association of State Energy Officials and Energy Futures
Initiative)
(2019),
US
Energy
and
Employment
Report
2019,
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5a98cf80ec4eb7c5cd928c61/t/5c7f3708fa0d60
36d7120d8f/1551849054549/USEER+2019+US+Energy+Employment+Report.pdf.



Pai, S., Zerriffi, H., Jewell, J. & Pathak, J. (2020), “Solar has greater techno-economic
resource suitability than wind for replacing coal mining jobs”, Environmental Research
Letters, Vol. 15, No. 3, https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/ab6c6d.



Samarina, V., Skufina, T., Samarin, A. & Ushakov, D. (2019), Modern conditions and
prospects of Russia’s coal mining industry development, Revista Espacios, Vol. 40,
No. 16, http://www.revistaespacios.com/a19v40n16/a19v40n16p06.pdf.

Annex A | Employment calculation methodology

147

A



Stockholm Environment Institute (2018), Contemporary coal dynamics in Indonesia,
SEI working paper 2018-04, https://www.sei.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/
contemporary-coal-dynamics-in-indonesia.pdf.



US Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020), Employment, Hours, and Earnings from the
Current Employment Statistics Survey (National) (database), https://data.bls.gov/
timeseries/CES1021210001, (accessed 2 June 2020).

Innovation
Batteries


ACEA (European Automobile Manufacturers Association) (2019), Employment trends in
the EU automotive industry, https://www.acea.be/statistics/article/employment.



Bauer, W., Riedel, O., Hermann, F., Borrmann, D., and Sachs, C. (2018), Perspektiven
des Wirtschaftsstandorts Deutschland in Zeiten zunehmender Elektromobilität (The
Effects of Vehicle Electrification on Employment in Germany), Fraunhofer Institute for
Systems and Innovation Research.



Benchmark Mineral Intelligence (2019), EV Battery Arms Race Enters New Gear with
115
Megafactories,
Europe
sees
most
rapid
growth,
https://www.benchmarkminerals.com/ev-battery-arms-race-enters-new-gear-with115-megafactories-europe-sees-most-rapid-growth/.



The Faraday Institution (2020), UK electric vehicle and battery production potential to
2040,
https://faraday.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/2040_Gigafactory
_Report_FINAL.pdf.



IEA (International Energy Agency) (2017), Energy Technology Perspectives 2017, Paris.



Steen, M., Lebedeva, N., Di Persio, F., Brett L. (2017), EU Competitiveness in Advanced
Li-ion Batteries for E-Mobility and Stationary Storage Applications – Opportunities and
Actions, EUR 28837 EN, Publications Office of the European Union, ISBN 978-92-7974292-7, doi:10.2760/75757, JRC108043.



Transport and Environment (2019), Electric surge: Carmakers‘ electric car plans across
Europe
2019-2025.
https://www.transportenvironment.org/sites/te/files/
publications/2019_07_TE_electric_cars_report_final.pdf.



US Census Bureau (2020), Annual Survey of Manufacturers: 2018 data,
https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/asm.html.

IEA. All rights reserved

Hydrogen


H2FC Supergen: The Hydrogen and fuel cell research hub. (2017) The Economic Impact
of
Hydrogen
and
Fuel
Cells
in
the
UK.
2017.
https://strathprints.strath.ac.uk/60503/1/Alabi_Turner_2017_employment.pdf.



IEA (International Energy Agency) (2017), Energy Technology Perspectives 2017, Paris.

148

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report



Karen Turner, O. Alabi, M. Smith, J. Irvine, P. Dodds. (2018) Framing policy on low
emissions vehicles in terms of economic gains: Might the most straightforward gain be
delivered by supply chain activity to support refuelling? Energy Policy 119.
https://pure.strath.ac.uk/ws/portalfiles/portal/81032437/Turner_etal_EP_2018_Frami
ng_policy_on_low_emissions_vehicles_in_terms_of_economic_gains.pdf.



McKinsey and Company. (2017) Hydrogen: The next wave for electric vehicles?
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/automotive-and-assembly/ourinsights/hydrogen-the-next-wave-for-electric-vehicles#.



US Department of Energy (2008), Effects of a Transition to a Hydrogen Economy on
Employment
in
the
United
States,
Report
to
Congress,.
https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/epact1820_employment_study.pdf.

IEA. All rights reserved

Carbon capture, utilisation and storage


Carbon Capture & Sequestration Technologies Group at MiT (2016), Boundary Dam
Fact Sheet: Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage Project, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, https://sequestration.mit.edu/tools/projects/boundary_dam.html.



The Carbon Capture and Storage Association and the Trades Union Congress (2014),
Carbon capture storage technology will reduce bills and create jobs, Carbon Capture
and Storage Association, https://www.tuc.org.uk/news/carbon-capture-storagetechnology-will-reduce-bills-and-create-jobs



IEA (International Energy Agency) (2017), Energy Technology Perspectives 2017, Paris.



Orion Innovations (UK) Ltd. (2013), The Economic Benefits of Carbon Capture and
Storage in the UK, The Trades Union Congress and Carbon Capture and Storage
Association, https://www.tuc.org.uk/sites/default/files/carboncapturebenefits.pdf.

A
Annex A | Employment calculation methodology

149

IEA. All rights reserved

Annex B
Definitions
This annex provides general information on terminology used throughout this report
including: units and general conversion factors; definitions of fuels, processes and sectors;
regional and country groupings; and abbreviations and acronyms.

Units

IEA. All rights reserved

Emissions

Gt CO2-eq
kg CO2-eq
g CO2/km
g CO2/kWh

gigatonnes of carbon-dioxide equivalent (using 100-year global
warming potentials for different greenhouse gases)
kilogrammes of carbon-dioxide equivalent
grammes of carbon dioxide per kilometre
grammes of carbon dioxide per kilowatt-hour

Energy

boe
toe
ktoe
Mtoe
MBtu
kWh
MWh
GWh
TWh

barrel of oil equivalent
tonne of oil equivalent
thousand tonnes of oil equivalent
million tonnes of oil equivalent
million British thermal units
kilowatt-hour
megawatt-hour
gigawatt-hour
terawatt-hour

Gas

bcm

billion cubic metres

Mass

kg
kt
Mt
Gt

kilogramme (1 000 kg = 1 tonne)
kilotonnes (1 tonne x 103)
million tonnes (1 tonne x 106)
gigatonnes (1 tonne x 109)

Monetary

$ million
$ billion
$ trillion

1 US dollar x 106
1 US dollar x 109
1 US dollar x 1012

Oil

b/d
kb/d
mb/d
mboe/d

barrels per day
thousand barrels per day
million barrels per day
million barrels of oil equivalent per day

Power

W
kW
MW
GW
TW

watt (1 joule per second)
kilowatt (1 watt x 103)
megawatt (1 watt x 106)
gigawatt (1 watt x 109)
terawatt (1 watt x 1012)

Annex B | Definitions

151

General conversion factors for energy
Convert to:
From:

TJ

Gcal

Mtoe

MBtu

GWh

multiply by:

TJ

1

238.8

2.388 x 10-5

947.8

0.2778

Gcal

4.1868 x 10-3

1

10-7

3.968

1.163 x 10-3

Mtoe

4.1868 x 104

107

1

3.968 x 107

11 630

MBtu

1.0551 x 10-3

0.252

2.52 x 10-8

1

2.931 x 10-4

GWh

3.6

860

8.6 x 10-5

3 412

1

Note: There is no generally accepted definition of barrel of oil equivalent (boe); typically the conversion
factors used vary from 7.15 to 7.40 boe per toe.

Currency conversion rates
We utilized the International Monetary Fund’s exchange rate archives 1 by month to adjust
stated currencies from the original currency into US dollars for the year the number was
cited from. From there, we updated those figures to 2019 US dollars.

Definitions
Abatement cost: Cost or savings associated with reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
by one tonne of carbon-dioxide equivalent (CO2-eq). Based on the lifetime cost of deploying
the measure and the savings that would be accrued to the consumer, discounted to the
present, divided by cumulative CO2-eq emissions savings over the measure’s lifetime.
Advanced biofuels: Sustainable fuels produced from non-food crop feedstocks, which are
capable of delivering significant lifecycle GHG emissions savings compared with fossil fuel
alternatives, and which do not directly compete with food and feed crops for agricultural
land or cause adverse sustainability impacts. This definition differs from the one used for
“advanced biofuels” in US legislation, which is based on a minimum 50% lifecycle GHG
reduction and which, therefore, includes sugar cane ethanol.
Back-up generation capacity: Households and businesses connected to the main power
grid may also have some form of “back-up” power generation capacity that can, in the
event of disruption, provide electricity. Back-up generators are typically fuelled with diesel
or gasoline and capacity can be as little as a few kilowatts. Such capacity is distinct from
mini-grid and off-grid systems that are not connected to the main power grid.

IEA. All rights reserved

Biodiesel: Diesel-equivalent, processed fuel made from the transesterification (a chemical
process that converts triglycerides in oils) of vegetable oils and animal fats.
Bioenergy: Energy content in solid, liquid and gaseous products derived from biomass
feedstocks and biogas. It includes solid biomass, biofuels and biogas.

1 https://www.imf.org/external/np/fin/data/param_rms_mth.aspx.

152

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Biofuels: Liquid fuels derived from biomass or waste feedstocks and include ethanol and
biodiesel. They can be classified as conventional and advanced biofuels according to the
feedstocks and technologies used to produce them. Unless otherwise stated, biofuels are
expressed in energy-equivalent volumes of gasoline and diesel.
Biogas: A mixture of methane, CO₂ and small quantities of other gases produced by
anaerobic digestion of organic matter in an oxygen-free environment.
Buildings: The buildings sector includes energy used in residential, commercial and
institutional buildings and non-specified other. Building energy use includes space heating
and cooling, water heating, lighting, appliances and cooking equipment.
Bunkers: Includes both international marine bunkers and international aviation bunkers.
Capacity credit: Proportion of the capacity that can be reliably expected to generate
electricity during times of peak demand for the grid to which it is connected.
Clean cooking facilities: Cooking facilities that are considered safer, more efficient and
more environmentally sustainable than the traditional facilities that make use of solid
biomass (such as a three-stone fire). This refers primarily to improved solid biomass
cookstoves, biogas systems, liquefied petroleum gas stoves, ethanol and solar stoves.
Coal: Includes both primary coal (including lignite, coking and steam coal) and derived fuels
(including patent fuel, brown-coal briquettes, coke-oven coke, gas coke, gas-works gas,
coke-oven gas, blast-furnace gas and oxygen steel furnace gas). Peat is also included.
Concessional loans: Loans whose terms are substantially more generous than market
loans, either by providing interest rates below those available on the market or by
providing grace periods.
Cost savings re-spend jobs: Jobs created by reduced customer energy costs being spent
elsewhere in an economy. These jobs can also be negative, for example, if the cost of
energy were to rise for consumers in the wider economy, leading to a reduction in spending
in other parts of an economy.
Construction: Jobs installing, constructing and commissioning energy projects.
Conventional biofuels: Fuels produced from food crop feedstocks. These biofuels are
commonly referred to as first-generation and include sugar cane ethanol, starch-based
ethanol, fatty acid methyl esther (FAME) and straight vegetable oil (SVO).
Decommissioning (nuclear): The process of dismantling and decontaminating a nuclear
power plant at the end of its operational lifetime and restoring the site for other uses.

IEA. All rights reserved

Demand-side integration: Consists of two types of measures: actions that influence load
shape such as energy efficiency and electrification; and actions that manage load such as
demand-side response measures.
Demand-side response: Describes actions which can influence the load profile such as
shifting the load curve in time without affecting the total electricity demand, or load
shedding such as interrupting demand for short duration or adjusting the intensity of
demand for a certain amount of time.
Annex B | Definitions

153

B

Direct jobs: Jobs created to deliver a final project or product.
Dispatchable: Dispatchable generation refers to technologies whose power output can be
readily controlled - increased to maximum rated capacity or decreased to zero - in order to
match supply with demand.
Electricity demand: Defined as total gross electricity generation less own-use generation,
plus net trade (imports less exports), less transmissions and distribution losses.
Electricity generation: Defined as the total amount of electricity generated by power only
or combined heat and power plants including generation required for own-use. This is also
referred to as gross generation.
Employment multiplier: The number of jobs created per million US dollars capital
investment or spent on final product.
Energy sector CO2 emissions: CO2 emissions from fuel combustion (excluding nonrenewable waste). Note that this does not include fugitive emissions from fuels, CO2
transport, storage emissions or industrial process emissions.
Energy sector GHG emissions: CO2 emissions from fuel combustion plus fugitive and vented
methane and nitrogen dioxide emissions from the energy and industry sectors.
Energy services: See useful energy.
Ethanol: Refers to bio-ethanol only. Ethanol is produced from fermenting any biomass high
in carbohydrates. Today, ethanol is made from starches and sugars, but second-generation
technologies will allow it to be made from cellulose and hemicellulose, the fibrous material
that makes up the bulk of most plant matter.
Fiscal consolidation: Reducing government deficits and debt accumulation.
Full-time employment (FTE) job: A job that represents the work of one person for one year
at regulated norms, for example 40 hours a week for 52 weeks a year, excluding holidays.
Heat (end-use): Can be obtained from the combustion of fossil or renewable fuels, direct
geothermal or solar heat systems, exothermic chemical processes and electricity (through
resistance heating or heat pumps which can extract it from ambient air and liquids). This
category refers to the wide range of end-uses, including space and water heating, and
cooking in buildings, desalination and process applications in industry. It does not include
cooling applications.

IEA. All rights reserved

Heat (supply): Obtained from the combustion of fuels, nuclear reactors, geothermal
resources and the capture of sunlight. It may be used for heating or cooling, or converted
into mechanical energy for transport or electricity generation. Commercial heat sold is
reported under total final consumption with the fuel inputs allocated under power
generation.
Hydropower: The energy content of the electricity produced in hydropower plants,
assuming 100% efficiency. It excludes output from pumped storage and marine (tide and
wave) plants.
154

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Indirect jobs: Supply chain jobs created to provide inputs to a final project or product.
Induced jobs: Jobs created by wages earned from projects and spent in other parts of the
economy, thereby creating additional jobs.
Industry: The sector includes fuel used within the manufacturing and construction
industries. Key industry branches include iron and steel, chemical and petrochemical,
cement, and pulp and paper. Use by industries for the transformation of energy into
another form or for the production of fuels is excluded and reported separately under
other energy sector. Consumption of fuels for the transport of goods is reported as part of
the transport sector, while consumption by off-road vehicles is reported under industry.
Investment: All investment data and projections reflect spending across the lifecycle of a
project, i.e. the capital spent is assigned to the year when it is incurred. Investments for oil,
gas and coal include production, transformation and transportation; those for the power
sector include refurbishments, uprates, new builds and replacements for all fuels and
technologies for on-grid, mini-grid and off-grid generation, as well as investment in
transmission and distribution, and battery storage. Investment data are presented in real
terms in year-2019 US dollars unless otherwise stated.
Job-years: One full-time employment job for one year.
Liquidity support: Providing individuals, firms or institutions lending or grants in order for a
solvent institution to make agreed-upon payments in a timely fashion.
Liquids: Refers to the combined use of oil and biofuels (expressed in energy-equivalent
volumes of gasoline and diesel).
Manufacturing: Jobs producing direct inputs to an energy project.
Mini-grids: Small grid systems linking a number of households or other consumers.
Modern energy access: Includes household access to a minimum level of electricity;
household access to safer and more sustainable cooking and heating fuels and stoves;
access that enables productive economic activity; and access for public services.
Modern renewables: Includes all uses of renewable energy with the exception of
traditional use of solid biomass.

IEA. All rights reserved

Modern use of solid biomass: Refers to the use of solid biomass in improved cookstoves
and modern technologies using processed biomass such as pellets.
Natural gas: Comprises gases occurring in deposits, whether liquefied or gaseous,
consisting mainly of methane. It includes both “non-associated” gas originating from fields
producing hydrocarbons only in gaseous form, and “associated” gas produced in
association with crude oil as well as methane recovered from coal mines (colliery gas).
Natural gas liquids, manufactured gas (produced from municipal or industrial waste, or
sewage) and quantities vented or flared are not included. Gas data in cubic metres are
expressed on a “gross” calorific value basis and are measured at 15 °C and at 760 mm Hg
(“Standard Conditions”). Gas data expressed in tonnes of oil equivalent, mainly for
comparison reasons with other fuels, are on a “net” calorific basis. The difference between
Annex B | Definitions

155

B

the net and the gross calorific value is the latent heat of vaporisation of the water vapour
produced during combustion of the fuel (for gas the net calorific value is 10% lower than
the gross calorific value).
Natural gas liquids (NGLs): Liquid or liquefied hydrocarbons produced in the manufacture,
purification and stabilisation of natural gas. These are those portions of natural gas which
are recovered as liquids in separators, field facilities or gas processing plants. NGLs include
but are not limited to ethane (when it is removed from the natural gas stream), propane,
butane, pentane, natural gasoline and condensates.
Non-energy use: Fuels used for chemical feedstocks and non-energy products. Examples of
non-energy products include lubricants, paraffin waxes, asphalt, bitumen, coal tars and oils
as timber preservatives.
Nuclear: Refers to the primary energy-equivalent of the electricity produced by a nuclear
plant, assuming an average conversion efficiency of 33%.
Off-grid systems: Stand-alone systems for individual households or groups of consumers.
Offshore wind: Refers to electricity produced by wind turbines that are installed in open
water, usually in the ocean.
Oil: Oil production includes both conventional and unconventional oil. Petroleum products
include refinery gas, ethane, liquid petroleum gas, aviation gasoline, motor gasoline, jet
fuels, kerosene, gas/diesel oil, heavy fuel oil, naphtha, white spirit, lubricants, bitumen,
paraffin, waxes and petroleum coke.
Oil field services: Firms that provide services to the petroleum exploration and production
industry but do not typically produce petroleum.
Operations and maintenance (O&M) and management: All ongoing jobs required to
support the proper operation of an energy project.
Other energy sector: Covers the use of energy by transformation industries and the energy
losses in converting primary energy into a form that can be used in the final consuming
sectors. It includes losses by gas works, petroleum refineries, blast furnaces, coke ovens,
coal and gas transformation and liquefaction. It also includes energy own-use in coal mines,
in oil and gas extraction and in electricity and heat production. Transfers and statistical
differences are also included in this category.
Payback period: The amount of time it takes to recover the cost of an investment.
Power generation: Refers to fuel use in electricity plants, heat plants and combined heat
and power (CHP) plants. Both main activity producer plants and small plants that produce
fuel for their own-use (auto-producers) are included.

IEA. All rights reserved

Remittance flows: Money sent by migrant workers back to their home countries
Renewables: Includes bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower, solar photovoltaic (PV),
concentrating solar power (CSP), wind and marine (tide and wave) energy for electricity
and heat generation.
156

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Residential sector: Energy used by households including space heating and cooling, water
heating, lighting, appliances, electronic devices and cooking equipment.
Self-sufficiency: Corresponds to indigenous production divided by total primary energy
demand.
Services sector: Energy used in commercial (e.g. hotels, offices, catering, shops) and
institutional buildings (e.g. schools, hospitals, offices). Energy use in the services sector
includes space heating and cooling, water heating, lighting, equipment, appliances and
cooking equipment.
Shale gas: Natural gas contained within a commonly occurring rock classified as shale.
Shale formations are characterised by low permeability, with more limited ability of gas to
flow through the rock than is the case with a conventional reservoir. Shale gas is generally
produced using hydraulic fracturing.
Solid biomass: Includes charcoal, fuelwood, dung, agricultural residues, wood waste and
other solid wastes.
Take-out financing: Long-term financing, typically to replace initial lending terms, that a
lender promises to provide at a particular future date or when particular criteria for
completion of a project are met.
Total final consumption (TFC): Is the sum of consumption by the various end-use sectors.
TFC is broken down into energy demand in the following sectors: industry (including
manufacturing and mining), transport, buildings (including residential and services) and
other (including agriculture and non-energy use). It excludes international marine and
aviation bunkers, except at world level where it is included in the transport sector.
Total final energy consumption (TFEC): Is a variable defined primarily for tracking progress
towards target 7.2 of the Sustainable Development Goals. It incorporates total final
consumption by end-use sectors but excludes non-energy use. It excludes international
marine and aviation bunkers, except at world level. Typically this is used in the context of
calculating the renewable energy share in total final energy consumption (Indicator 7.2.1 of
the Sustainable Development Goals), where TFEC is the denominator.
Total primary energy demand (TPED): Represents domestic demand only and is broken
down into power generation, other energy sector and total final consumption.

IEA. All rights reserved

Traditional use of solid biomass: Refers to the use of solid biomass with basic technologies,
such as a three-stone fire, often with no or poorly operating chimneys.
Transport: Fuels and electricity used in the transport of goods or persons within the
national territory irrespective of the economic sector within which the activity occurs. This
includes fuel and electricity delivered to vehicles using public roads or for use in rail
vehicles; fuel delivered to vessels for domestic navigation; fuel delivered to aircraft for
domestic aviation; and energy consumed in the delivery of fuels through pipelines. Fuel
delivered to international marine and aviation bunkers is presented only at the world level
and is excluded from the transport sector at a domestic level.
Annex B | Definitions

157

B

Useful energy: Refers to the energy that is available to end-users to satisfy their needs. This
is also referred to as energy services demand. As result of transformation losses at the
point of use, the amount of useful energy is lower than the corresponding final energy
demand for most technologies. Equipment using electricity often has higher conversion
efficiency than equipment using other fuels, meaning that for a unit of energy consumed
electricity can provide more energy services.
Variable renewable energy (VRE): Refers to technologies whose maximum output at any
time depends on the availability of fluctuating renewable energy resources. VRE includes a
broad array of technologies such as wind power, solar PV, run-of-river hydro, concentrating
solar power (where no thermal storage is included) and marine (tidal and wave).
Waste storage and disposal: Activities related to the management of radioactive nuclear
waste. Storage refers to temporary facilities at the nuclear power plant site or a centralised
site. Disposal refers to permanent facilities for the long-term isolation of high-level waste,
such as deep geologic repositories.

Regional and country groupings
Advanced economies: OECD regional grouping and Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus1,2, Malta and
Romania.
Africa: North Africa and sub-Saharan Africa regional groupings.
Asia Pacific: Southeast Asia regional grouping and Australia, Bangladesh, China, India,
Japan, Korea, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Mongolia, Nepal, New Zealand,
Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Chinese Taipei and other Asia Pacific countries and territories.3
Caspian: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan
and Uzbekistan.
Central and South America: Argentina, Plurinational State of Bolivia (Bolivia), Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Curaçao, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uruguay, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (Venezuela), and other Central and
South American countries and territories.4
China: Includes the (People's Republic of) China and Hong Kong, China.
Eurasia: Caspian regional grouping and the Russian Federation (Russia).

IEA. All rights reserved

Europe: European Union regional grouping and Albania, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
North Macedonia, Gibraltar, Iceland, Israel5, Kosovo, Montenegro, Norway, Serbia,
Switzerland, Republic of Moldova, Turkey and Ukraine.
European Union: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus1,2, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovak Republic, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden and United Kingdom.
158

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Figure B.1 ⊳

World Energy Outlook SR main country groupings

Note: This map is without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and
boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.

IEA (International Energy Agency): OECD regional grouping excluding Chile, Iceland, Israel,
Latvia, Lithuania and Slovenia.
Latin America: Central and South America regional grouping and Mexico.
Middle East: Bahrain, Islamic Republic of Iran (Iran), Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syrian Arab Republic (Syria), United Arab Emirates and Yemen.
Non-OECD: All other countries not included in the OECD regional grouping.
Non-OPEC: All other countries not included in the OPEC regional grouping.
North Africa: Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco and Tunisia.
North America: Canada, Mexico and United States.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development): Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Canada, Chile, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovak Republic, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom and United States.

IEA. All rights reserved

OPEC (Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries): Algeria, Angola, Republic of the
Congo (Congo), Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Islamic Republic of Iran (Iran), Iraq, Kuwait,
Libya, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates and Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
(Venezuela), based on membership status as of April 2020
Southeast Asia: Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic (Lao PDR), Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.
These countries are all members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Annex B | Definitions

159

B

Sub-Saharan Africa: Angola, Benin, Botswana, Cameroon, Republic of the Congo (Congo),
Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Kenya,
Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, South Sudan,
Sudan, United Republic of Tanzania (Tanzania), Togo, Zambia, Zimbabwe and other African
countries and territories.6

Country notes
1 Note by Turkey: The information in this document with reference to “Cyprus” relates to the southern part

of the Island. There is no single authority representing both Turkish and Greek Cypriot people on the Island.
Turkey recognises the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC). Until a lasting and equitable solution is
found within the context of the United Nations, Turkey shall preserve its position concerning the “Cyprus
issue”.
2 Note by all the European Union Member States of the OECD and the European Union: The Republic of
Cyprus is recognised by all members of the United Nations with the exception of Turkey. The information in
this document relates to the area under the effective control of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus.
3 Individual data are not available and are estimated in aggregate for: Afghanistan, Bhutan, Cook Islands, Fiji,

French Polynesia, Kiribati, Lao People’s Democratic Republic (Lao PDR), Macau (China), Maldives, New
Caledonia, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Timor-Leste and Tonga and Vanuatu.
Individual data are not available and are estimated in aggregate for: Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba,
Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bermuda, Bonaire, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Dominica, Falkland
Islands (Malvinas), French Guiana, Grenada, Guadeloupe, Guyana, Martinique, Montserrat, Saba, Saint
Eustatius, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Saint Vincent and Grenadines, Saint
Maarten, Turks and Caicos Islands.
4

5 The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant Israeli authorities.

The use of such data by the OECD and/or the IEA is without prejudice to the status of the Golan Heights, East
Jerusalem and Israeli settlements in the West Bank under the terms of international law.
6
Individual data are not available and are estimated in aggregate for: Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Kingdom of Eswatini, Gambia, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Réunion, Rwanda, Sao Tome and
Principe, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia and Uganda.

IEA. All rights reserved

Abbreviations and Acronyms
BEV
CCGT
CGE
CH4
CO
CO2
CO2-eq
DER
DSI
DSR
EOR
EU
EU ETS
EV
GDP
160

battery electric vehicles
combined-cycle gas turbine
computable general equilibrium (models)
methane
carbon monoxide
carbon dioxide
carbon-dioxide equivalent
distributed energy resources
demand-side integration
demand-side response
enhanced oil recovery
European Union
European Union Emissions Trading System
electric vehicle
gross domestic product
World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

IEA. All rights reserved

GHG
GIMF
HFO
IAEA
ICE
ICT
IEA
IFI
IIASA
IMF
IMO
IOC
IPCC
LCV
LDAR
LNG
LPG
MDBs
NAICs
NACE
NEA
NOX
OECD
PHEV
PLDV
PM
PM2.5
PPP
PV
R&D
RD&D
SDS
SME
SMR
SO2
T&D
TFC
TFEC
TPED
UN
UNDP
UNEP
US
VRE

greenhouse gases
Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal (model)
heavy fuel oil
International Atomic Energy Agency
internal combustion engine
information and communication technologies
International Energy Agency
international finance institutions
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
International Monetary Fund
International Maritime Organization
international oil company
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
light-commercial vehicle
Leak detection and repair
liquefied natural gas
liquefied petroleum gas
multilateral development banks
North American Industry Classification System
Nomenclature of Economic Activities
Nuclear Energy Agency (an agency within the OECD)
nitrogen oxides
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
plug-in hybrid electric vehicles
passenger light-duty vehicle
particulate matter
fine particulate matter
purchasing power parity
photovoltaics
research and development
research, development and demonstration
Sustainable Development Scenario
small and medium enterprises
small modular nuclear reactor
sulfur dioxide
transmission and distribution
total final consumption
total final energy consumption
total primary energy demand
United Nations
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Environment Programme
United States
variable renewable energy

Annex B | Definitions

B
161

IEA. All rights reserved

WEM
WEO
WHO

162

World Energy Model
World Energy Outlook
World Health Organization

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Annex C
References
Chapter 1: Covid-19 and energy: setting the scene
Agrawala, S., D. Dussaux and N. Monti (2020), "What policies for greening the crisis
response and economic recovery? Lessons learned from past green stimulus measures and
implications for the COVID-19 crisis", OECD Environment Working Papers, No. 164,
Organisation
for
Economic
Co-operation
and
Development,
Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/c50f186f-en.
Battersby, B., W. Lam and E. Ture (2020), “Tracking the $9 trillion global fiscal support to
fight covid-19”, (blog) International Monetary Fund, https://blogs.imf.org/2020/05/20/
tracking-the-9-trillion-global-fiscal-support-to-fight-covid-19/.
Cambridge Econometrics (2011), Assessing the Implementation and Impact of Green
Elements of Member States’ National Recovery Plans, Final Report for the European
Commission (DG Environment), Cambridge, United Kingdom, https://ec.europa.eu/
environment/enveco/growth_jobs_social/pdf/studies/green_recovery_plans.pdf.
Conticini, E., B. Frediani and D. Caro (2020), “Can atmospheric pollution be considered a cofactor in extremely high level of SARS-CoV-2 lethality in Northern Italy?”, Environmental
Pollution Vol. 261, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.114465.
Cui, Y. et al. (2003), “Air pollution and case fatality of SARS in the People's Republic of
China: an ecologic study”, Environmental Health Vol. 2 (15), https://doi.org/10.1186/1476069X-2-15.
Elgin, C., G. Basbug and A. Yalaman (2020), “Economic policy responses to a pandemic:
developing the covid-19 economic stimulus index”, Covid Economics: Vetted and Real Time
Papers, Issue 3, pp. 40-54, Centre for Economic Policy Research Press 2020,
http://web.boun.edu.tr/elgin/COVID_19.pdf.
Gentilini, U. et al. (2020), “Social protection and jobs responses to Covid-19: a real-time
review of country measures”, Living Paper, ver. 7, 1 May 2020, World Bank, Washington,
DC.
IATA (International Air Transport Association) (2020), 25 Million Jobs at Risk with Airline
Shutdown, 7 April 2020, Geneva.
IEA (International Energy Agency) (2020a), Global Energy Review 2020, Paris.

IEA. All rights reserved

IEA (2020b), “Energy market turmoil deepens challenges for many major oil and gas
exporters”, Paris, https://www.iea.org/articles/energy-market-turmoil-deepens-challengesfor-many-major-oil-and-gas-exporters.
IEA (2020c), Oil Market Report - May 2020, Paris.
IEA (2020d), World Energy Investment 2020, Paris.

Annex C | References

163

IEA (2020e), “As the Covid-19 crisis hammers the auto industry, electric cars remain a bright
spot”, Paris, https://www.iea.org/commentaries/as-the-covid-19-crisis-hammers-the-autoindustry-electric-cars-remain-a-bright-spot.
IEA (2019), Africa Energy Outlook, Paris.
IEA (2019b), World Energy Outlook-2019, Paris.
IEA (2018), Outlook for Producer Economies, Paris.
IEA (2015), Making the Energy Sector More Resilient to Climate Change, Paris,
https://www.iea.org/reports/making-the-energy-sector-more-resilient-to-climate-change.
International Institute for Labour Studies (2011), “A review of global fiscal stimulus”, EC-IILS
Joint Discussion Paper Series No. 5, https://www.ilo.org/inst/research/addressing-crisischallenges/discussion-paper-series/WCMS_194175/lang--en/index.htm.
ILO (International Labour Organization) (2020), ILO Monitor: COVID-19 and the World of
Work, Third edition, ILO, Geneva.
IMF (International Monetary Fund) (2020a), IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2020: The
Great Lockdown, Washington DC.
IMF (2020b), IMF World Economic Outlook Database, April 2020 Edition, Washington DC.
Mundaca, L. and J. Richter (2015), “Assessing 'green energy economy' stimulus packages:
Evidence from the US programs targeting renewable energy”, Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, Vol. 42, pp. 1174-1186, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.10.060.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) (2020), OECD Economic
Outlook, June 2020, Paris.
OECD (2017), Enhancing the Contributions of SMEs in a global and digitalised economy,
Meeting of the OECD Council at Ministerial Level, 7-8 June 2017, Paris,
https://www.oecd.org/industry/C-MIN-2017-8-EN.pdf.
Setti, L. et al. (2020), “Searching for SARS-COV-2 on particulate matter: a possible early
indicator of covid-19 epidemic recurrence”, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, 17(9),
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17092986.
TomTom International (2020), TomTom Traffic Index, https://www.tomtom.com/en_gb/
traffic-index/.
Wong, C. (2011), “The fiscal stimulus programme and public governance issues in china”,
OECD Journal on Budgeting, Vol. 11/3, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/16812336.

IEA. All rights reserved

World Bank (2020), “Covid-19 Crisis through a Migration Lens”, Washington DC.

164

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Chapter 2: Evaluation of possible recovery measures
ACEA (European Automobile Manufacturers Association) (2020a), Commercial vehicle
registrations: -34.5% four months into 2020; -67.0% in April (press release), 26 May 2020,
https://www.acea.be/press-releases/article/commercial-vehicle-registrations-34.5-fourmonths-into-2020-67.0-in-april.
ACEA (2020b), Automakers and electricity sector call for rapid action on charging points
under EU recovery plan, 9 June 2020, https://www.acea.be/press-releases/article/fueltypes-of-new-buses-diesel-85-hybrid-4.8-electric-4-alternative-fuels-6.
AIE (European Association of Electrical Contractors) (2018), Powering a New Value Chain in
the Automotive Sector: Job Potential of Transport Electrification, AIE, Brussels,
https://download.dalicloud.com/fis/download/66a8abe211271fa0ec3e2b07/c572c686f52f-4c0d-88fc-51f9061126c5/Powering_a_new_value_chain_in_the_automotive_sector__the_job_potential_of_transport_electrification.pdf.
Benchmark Minerals (2020), EV battery arms race enters new gear with 115 megafactories,
Europe sees most rapid growth, https://www.benchmarkminerals.com/ev-battery-armsrace-enters-new-gear-with-115-megafactories-europe-sees-most-rapid-growth/.
Bieker, G. and P. Mock (2020), Green vehicle replacement programs as a response to the
COVID-19 crisis: Lessons learned from past programs and guidelines for the future,
International Council on Clean Transportation, Washington DC, https://theicct.org/
publications/vehicle-replacement-programs-covid-19-may2020.
BNEF (Bloomberg New Energy Finance) (2019), Battery Pack Prices Fall As Market Ramps
Up With Market Average At $156/kWh In 2019, https://about.bnef.com/blog/battery-packprices-fall-as-market-ramps-up-with-market-average-at-156-kwh-in-2019/
Boursier (2020), Coronavirus : après la RATP, la SNCF rembourse aussi les abonnements en
avril (Coronavirus: after RATP, SNCF also reimburses subscriptions in April),
https://www.boursier.com/actualites/economie/coronavirus-apres-la-ratp-la-sncfrembourse-aussi-les-abonnements-en-avril-43549.html.
CEIC (2020), India Cement: Production, CEIC Data, https://www.ceicdata.com/en/india/
infrastructure-industries-index-201112100/cement-production.

IEA. All rights reserved

CEMNET (2020), “China’s cement industry expected to lead economic recovery”,
International Cement Review, https://www.cemnet.com/News/story/168723/china-scement-industry-expected-to-lead-economic-recovery.html.
Cisco (2018), Cisco Visual Networking Index Complete Forecast Update, 2017–2022, Cisco,
San Jose, CA., https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/m/en_us/network-intelligence/serviceprovider/digital-transformation/knowledge-network-webinars/pdfs/1213-businessservices-ckn.pdf.
Citymapper (2020), Citymapper Mobility Index (database), https://citymapper.com/cmi.
Annex C | References

165

C

Ecocounter (2020), Understand the impact of the pandemic on cycling, https://www.ecocompteur.com/en/covid19-dashboard/.
EEA (European Energy Agency) (2018), Electric Vehicles from Lifecycle and Circular
Economy Perspectives, EEA, Copenhagen, https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/
electric-vehicles-from-life-cycle.
ESMAP (Energy Sector Management Assistance Program) (2020), Off-Grid Solar Market
Trends Report 2020, World Bank, Washington DC., https://www.esmap.org/off-grid-solarmarket-trends-report-2020.
ESMAP (2019), Mini Grids for Half a Billion People, World Bank, Washington DC.,
https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/energy/publication/mini-grids-for-half-a-billionpeople.
Federal Reserve (US) 2020, Industrial Production Index, https://fred.stlouisfed.org/
series/INDPRO.
FES (Friedrich Ebert Stiftung) (2015), The Future of the German Automotive Industry,
Structural Change in the Automotive Industry: Challenges and Perspectives,
https://library.fes.de/pdf-files/wiso/12165.pdf.
GOGLA (Global Off-Grid Lighting Association)
https://www.gogla.org/powering-opportunity.

(2020),

IEA (International Energy Agency) (2020a), Global
https://www.iea.org/reports/global-energy-review-2020.

Powering
Energy

opportunity,

Review,

Paris,

IEA (2020b), Renewable Energy Market Update, Paris,https://www.iea.org/reports/
renewable-energy-market-update.
IEA (2020c), “Clean energy progress after the Covid-19 crisis will need reliable supplies of
critical minerals”, Paris, https://www.iea.org/articles/clean-energy-progress-after-thecovid-19-crisis-will-need-reliable-supplies-of-critical-minerals.
IEA (2020d), World Energy Investment 2020, Paris, https://www.iea.org/reports/worldenergy-investment-2020.
IEA (2020e), “As the Covid-19 crisis hammers the auto industry, electric cars remain a bright
spot”, Paris, https://www.iea.org/commentaries/as-the-covid-19-crisis-hammers-the-autoindustry-electric-cars-remain-a-bright-spot.

IEA. All rights reserved

IEA (2020f), Tracking Clean Energy Progress: Truck
https://www.iea.org/fuels-and-technologies/trucks-buses.

and

Buses,

Paris,

IEA (2020g), “Working from home can save energy and reduce emissions. But how much”?,
Paris,
https://www.iea.org/commentaries/working-from-home-can-save-energy-andreduce-emissions-but-how-much.

166

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

IEA (2020h), Tracking Buildings: Data Centres and Data Transmission Networks, Paris,
https://www.iea.org/reports/tracking-buildings/data-centres-and-data-transmissionnetworks.
IEA (2020i), Outlook for Biogas and Biomethane: Prospects for Organic Growth, Paris,
https://www.iea.org/reports/outlook-for-biogas-and-biomethane-prospects-for-organicgrowth.
IEA (2020j), Methane Tracker, Paris, https://www.iea.org/reports/methane-tracker2020/interactive-country-and-regional-estimates.
IEA (2019a), Africa Energy Outlook, Paris, https://www.iea.org/reports/africa-energyoutlook-2019.
IEA (2019b), Nuclear Power in a Clean Energy System, Paris, https://www.iea.org/
reports/nuclear-power-in-a-clean-energy-system.
IEA (2019c), World Energy Outlook 2019, Paris, https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energyoutlook-2019.
IEA (2019d), The Future of Rail, Paris, https://www.iea.org/reports/the-future-of-rail.
IEA, IRENA, UNSD, World Bank, WHO (2020), Tracking SDG 7: The Energy Progress Report,
World Bank, Washington DC, https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/
Publication/2019/May/2019-Tracking-SDG7-Report.pdf.
HIS (2020a), IHS US Manufacturing PMI, IHS Markit, https://www.fxempire.com/macro/
united-states/manufacturing-pmi.
HIS (2020b), Global commercial vehicle to drop 22 percent, IHS Markit,
https://ihsmarkit.com/research-analysis/global-commercial-vehicle-production-expectedto-drop-22-perce.html.
ILO (International Labour
https://ilostat.ilo.org/.

Organization)

(2020),

ILOSTAT

Database,

Geneva,

India Times (2019), “India installed 181,000 solar power pumps for irrigation in three years
under PM-KUSUM scheme”, https://energy.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/
renewable/india-installed-181000-solar-power-pumps-for-irrigation-in-three-years-underpm-kusum-scheme/73030827.
Institute for Supply Management (2020), PMI Composite Index, https://www.quandl.com/
data/ISM/MAN_PMI-PMI-Composite-Index.

IEA. All rights reserved

IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency) (2020), Renewable Power Generation Costs
in 2019, Abu Dhabi.
IRENA (2019), Renewable Energy and Jobs Annual Review 2019, Abu Dhabi.

Annex C | References

C
167

IRJ (International Rail Journal) (2020), “UITP projects €40bn hit for European public
transport in 2020”, https://www.railjournal.com/financial/uitp-projects-e40bn-hit-foreuropean-public-transport-in-2020/.
ITU (International Telecommunication Union) (2020), ICT Statistics, https://www.itu.int/
en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx.
Loo, B. P. (2018), Unsustainable Transport and Transition in China, Routledge,
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315677941.
Malmodin, J. and D. Lundén (2018), “The energy and carbon footprint of the global ICT and
E&M sectors 2010–2015”, Sustainability Vol. 10(9), pp. 3027.
Masanet, E. et al., (2020), “Recalibrating global data center energy-use estimates”, Science
Vol. 367(6481), pp. 984-986, doi: 10.1126/science.aba3758.
Mercom India, (2020), Over 181,000 Solar Water Pumps Installed in India, Mercom,
https://mercomindia.com/over-181000-solar-water-pumps-installed/.
MIIT (Chinese Ministry of Industry and Information Technology) (2020), 关于完善新能源汽
车推广应用财政补贴政策的通知 (Notice regarding the improvement of the promotion
and application of financial subsidy policies for new energy vehicles Caijian),
http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/zhengceku/2020-04/23/content_5505502.htm.
MNRE (Ministry of New and Renewable Energy - India) (2020), Annual Report 2019-2020,
Delhi, https://mnre.gov.in/knowledge-center/publication.
Moovit (2020), Moovit (database), https://moovitapp.com/.
NEA (Nuclear Energy Agency) and OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and
Development) (2016), Small Modular Reactors: Nuclear Energy Market Potential for Nearterm Deployment, NEA/OECD, Paris, https://www.oecd-nea.org/ndd/pubs/2016/7213smrs.pdf.
Northern Lights PCI (Project of Common Interest) (2020), CCS and the EU Covid-19
Recovery Plan, https://northernlightsccs.com/assets/documents/Northern-Lights-PCIMemorandum-Value-of-a-European-CCS-Ecosystem-in-Green-Recovery.pdf.
Peace, B. (2020), Covid-19 Updated Impact Assessment, International Aviation Transport
Association, Montreal, https://www.iata.org/en/iata-repository/publications/economicreports/covid-fourth-impact-assessment/.

IEA. All rights reserved

Railway Technology (2018), The world’s biggest railway operators in 2018,
https://www.railway-technology.com/features/worlds-biggest-railway-operators-2018/.
Raje, F. and A. Saffrey (2016), The Value of Cycling, UK Department for Transport, London,
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment
_data/file/509587/value-of-cycling.pdf.

168

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Romer, C. and C. Carroll (2009), Economic Analysis of the Car Allowance Rebate System
("Cash for clunkers"), US Executive Office of the President, Washington DC,
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/blog/2010/04/05/did-cash-clunkers-workintended.
S&P Global Platts (2020), Olefins Outlook, New York, https://www.spglobal.com/platts/
plattscontent/_assets/_files/en/specialreports/oil/platts_2020_outlook_report.pdf.
Sandvine (2020), The Global Internet Phenomena Report COVID-19 Spotlight May 2020,
Sandvine, Tokyo https://www.sandvine.com/hubfs/Sandvine_Redesign_2019/Downloads/
2020/Phenomena/COVID%20Internet%20Phenomena%20Report%2020200507.pdf.
Saunois et al. (2016), “The Global Methane Budget 2000–2012”, Earth System Science Data,
VOL. 8, pp. 697–751.
Shakti Sustainable Energy Foundation (2018), Solar for Irrigation – A Comparative
Assessment of Deployment Strategies, Council on Energy, Environment and Water, Dehli,
https://shaktifoundation.in/report/solar-irrigation-comparative-assessment-deploymentstrategies/?psec=Mg==#NjIzMw==
Smart Growth America (2011), Recent Lessons from the Stimulus: Transportation Funding
and Job Creation, Washington DC, https://smartgrowthamerica.org/app/legacy/
documents/lessons-from-the-stimulus.pdf.
Statista (2020), Manufacturing Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) in China from April 2018
to
April
2020,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/271770/china-manufacturingpurchasing-managers-index/.
Sumits, A. (2015), The History and Future of Internet Traffic, Cisco, San Jose, CA,
https://blogs.cisco.com/sp/the-history-and-future-of-internet-traffic.
TERI (The Energy and Resources Institute) (2014), The Energy and Resources Institute
Energy and Environment Data Directory and Yearbook, New Delhi.
Thouthang, L. and R. Kumar (2019), Can India’s 30m grid/diesel irrigation pumps go solar?,
Energypost.eu,https://energypost.eu/can-indias-30m-grid-diesel-irrigation-pumps-gosolar/.
Townsend, A., N. Raji and A. Zapantis (2020), The Value of Carbon Capture and Storage,
Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, Docklands, www.globalccsinstitute.com/
resources/publications-reports-research/the-value-of-carbon-capture-ccs/.

IEA. All rights reserved

Trading Economics (2020a), China growth, https://tradingeconomics.com/china/industrialproduction.
Trading Economics (2020b), India growth, https://tradingeconomics.com/india/industrialproduction.

Annex C | References

169

C

Trading Economics (2020c), Eurozone industrial production, https://tradingeconomics.com/
euro-area/industrial-production.
UIC (International Union of Railways) (2017), “Analysis of regional differences in global rail
projects
by
cost,
length
and
project
stage”,
https://uic.org/IMG/pdf/
analysis_of_global_rail_infrastructure_investment.pdf.
UITP (Union Internationale des Transports Publics) (2011), Employment in public transport:
13 million people worldwide!, Brussels, https://www.uitp.org/sites/default/files/cck-focuspapers-files/Employment_in_PT_13Mio_2011.pdf.
UK Department of Transport (2014), Value for Money Assessment for Cycling Grants, UK
DfT,
London
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment_data/file/348943/vfm-assessment-of-cycling-grants.pdf.
UN University (2014), “India plans to convert water pumps from diesel to solar”,
https://ourworld.unu.edu/en/india-plans-to-convert-water-pumps-from-diesel-to-solar.
UNEP (UN Environment Programme) (2012), Green Economy Briefing Paper Poverty
Reduction,
Nairobi,
https://www.greengrowthknowledge.org/sites/default/files/
downloads/resource/Green_economy_briefing_paper_poverty_reduction_UNEP.pdf.
US Census Bureau (2020), Advance monthly sales for retail and food services, Washington
DC, https://www.census.gov/retail/marts/www/marts_current.pdf.
US GAO (United States Government Accountability Office) (2010), Auto Industry Lessons
Learned from Cash for Clunkers Program, Washington DC, https://www.gao.gov/
products/GAO-10-486.
Wietschel M. et al. (2017), Perspektiven des Wirtschaftsstandorts Deutschland in Zeiten
zunehmender Elektromobilität (The Effects of Vehicle Electrification on Employment in
Germany), Fraunhofer ISI, Karlsruhe, https://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/isi/
dokumente/sustainability-innovation/2017/WP09-2017_Perspektiven-AutomobilindustrieElektromobilitaet_Wietschel-et-al.pdf.
World Health Organization (2019), Household Energy Database, World Health Organization,
Geneva, https://www.who.int/airpollution/data/household-energy-database/en/
World
Steel
Association
(2020),
Crude
steel
production,
Brussels,
https://www.worldsteel.org/media-centre/press-releases/2020/March-2020-crude-steelproduction.html.

IEA. All rights reserved

WSDOT (Washington State Department of Transportation) (2020), “Declining ridership due
to COVID-19 brings change to Amtrak Cascades trains”, https://www.wsdot.wa.gov/
news/2020/03/25/declining-ridership-due-covid-19-brings-change-amtrak-cascades-trains.

170

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Chapter 3: A sustainable recovery plan for the energy sector
Anderson et al. (2013), Getting to know GIMF: The Simulation Properties of the Global
Integrated Monetary and Fiscal Model, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC,
https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2013/wp1355.pdf.
Battersby, B., W. , R. Lam and E. Ture (2020), “Tracking the $9 trillion Global fiscal support
to Fight COVID-19”, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC, https://blogs.imf.org/
2020/05/20/tracking-the-9-trillion-global-fiscal-support-to-fight-covid-19/.
Cronk, R. and J. Bartram (2018), “Environmental conditions in health care facilities in low
and middle-income countries: coverage and inequalities”, International Journal of Hygiene
and Environmental Health, Vol. 221, Issue 3, pp. 409-422.
European Commission (2020), Taxonomy: Final report of the Technical Expert Group on
Sustainable Finance, EU Technical Expert Group on Sustainable Finance, Brussels,
https://ec.europa.eu/knowledge4policy/publication/sustainable-finance-teg-final-reporteu-taxonomy_en.
IEA (International Energy Agency) (2020), “Low fuel prices provide a historic opportunity to
phase out fossil fuel consumption subsidies”, Paris, https://www.iea.org/articles/low-fuelprices-provide-a-historic-opportunity-to-phase-out-fossil-fuel-consumption-subsidies.
ILO (International Labour Organization) (2019), A Quantum Leap for Gender Equality: For a
Better Future of Work for All, Geneva, https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/--dgreports/---dcomm/---publ/documents/publication/wcms_674831.pdf.
IMF (International Monetary Fund) and World Bank Group (2020), Background Note for
Mobilizing with Africa, High-Level Virtual Event on Mobilizing with Africa,
https://meetings.imf.org/~/media/AMSM/Files/SM2020/mobilizing-with-africabackground-note.ashx?la=en.
Laxton, D. et al. (2010), The Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal Model (GIMF) –
Theoretical Structure, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC, https://www.imf.org/
~/media/Websites/IMF/imported-full-text-pdf/external/pubs/ft/wp/2010/_wp1034.ashx.
Matikainen, S., E. Campiglio and D. Zenghelis (2017), “The climate impact of quantitative
easing”, London School of Economics, London, DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.24108.05763.
OECD/The World Bank/UN Environment (2018), "Rethink development finance for climate",
in Environment, Financing Climate Futures: Rethinking Infrastructure, Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris.

IEA. All rights reserved

Ratha, D. et al. (2020), "COVID-19 Crisis through a Migration Lens", Migration and
Development Brief, No. 32, World Bank Group, Washington, DC.
Spiegel, S., O. Schwank and M. Obaidy (2020), UN/DESA Policy Brief #72: COVID-19 and
Sovereign Debt, 14 May 2020, United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
New York.
Annex C | References

171

C

UN DESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs) (2020), New York,
https://www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/publication/un-desa-policy-brief-72-covid19-and-sovereign-debt/.

IEA. All rights reserved

TCFD (Task force for Climate-related Financial Discolure) (2017), Recommendations of the
Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures, London, https://www.fsbtcfd.org/publications/final-recommendations-report/.

172

World Energy Outlook 2020 | Special Report

Sustainable Recovery
World Energy Outlook Special Report

This publication reflects the views of the IEA Secretariat but does not necessarily reflect
those of individual IEA member countries. The IEA makes no representation or warranty,
express or implied, in respect of the publication’s contents (including its completeness or
accuracy) and shall not be responsible for any use of, or reliance on, the publication.
Unless otherwise indicated, all material presented in figures and tables is derived from IEA
data and analysis.
This publication and any map included herein are without prejudice to the status of or
sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries
and to the name of any territory, city or area.

IEA. All rights reserved.
IEA Publications
International Energy Agency
Website: www.iea.org
Contact information: www.iea.org/about/contact

Revised version, July 2020. Information notice found at:
www.iea.org/corrigenda/

Typeset and printed in France by IEA - June 2020
Cover design: IEA
Photo credits: Sutterstock

